Uh, well, good afternoon, Ellen Or, and good afternoon to your
team. And welcome back to Education and Workforce.
Thank you for, um, scheduling time in to spend with us this
afternoon. Um, as you know, uh, we follow a
structured agenda, um, in this committee.
And there, w- we will try and stick broadly to the, or we will stick broadly to the
headings as we go through the afternoon.
Um, but, uh, allow some free flow with the
sub-headings. Kick off with some introductory remarks from yourself,
um, and then I'll open up to questions from the committee.
Well, kia ora koutou. Uh, I'm Ellen MacGregory, Secretary for Education.
I appreciate you making time for me to come, uh, and spend with you this
afternoon. I have some members of my leadership team here with me
today. Um, I may invite them to the table from time to
time, um, and I'll make sure that they introduce themselves, uh, and where they're
from. Uh, recognize that, uh, we only get this opportunity once a
year, and time is valuable, so, um, I won't make any further opening
remarks, and I'm happy to move into questions.
Great. Thank you, Ellen. Lawrence.
Um, thank you all for coming, and first of all, congratulations, Ellen.
Mm-hmm.
Um,
we're gonna start in terms of the structured agenda.
The first part is early learning. And I wanna start with something that,
um,
we just heard from ERO. 'Cause s- so just before we had ERO, in one of the reports
that they've done, they look at the fact that
47%,
um, in, of the ECE sector, and I think the term they used
was, um,
independent or et cetera, I can't remember the exact term...
Oh, standalone services, 47% fell below the
expectation for quality learning.
Mm.
And I wondered, to start off with, what is then MOE doing
to take onboard the feedback?
Mm.
And how does that feature into what you are seeing in terms of some of the ECE
reforms, um, and how that would enhance, uh,
quality of teaching and learning within the ECE space?
Mm. So generally across, um, ERO recommendations, my
posture is unless we have a really good reason not to act on them, we
act on them. Um, with ECE, um, we have
a, uh, range of staff who work directly with ECE
around their licensing, which includes quality of
ECE, and have professional development available, um, for that
quality curriculum. Um, we do have a range of curriculum tools
available. I might ask Pauline Cleaver, Deputy Secretary for the Curriculum please
to come to the table, and just talk quickly about Kōwhiri
Whakapae.
Um, Kōwhiri Whakapae are a range of tools that support, um, teachers
implement, uh, the Te Whariki, the early learning
curriculum. These practice tools support teachers, uh, in
areas of oral language, social and emotional learning, and mathematics, as
being key areas of, um, you know, uh,
key concepts for learning, uh, that supports go- uh, young people
in, in their journey towards schooling.
Um, it helps them with their early literacy, uh, that,
uh, transition into school, being able to relate with
others, uh, and manage themselves, uh, as they,
uh, start their formal education journey.
We've got a range of tools and resources that support that, and professional
learning and development available for teachers online, and
through a range of, uh, videos, et cetera,
uh, that teachers can access in their own time, uh, to
develop their skills, their practices-
Mm.
... uh, in those areas.
And those tools have been very well received.
Um, but we are also looking at regulatory reform. Andy.
Yes. So, um, you'll be aware that a, a substantial, uh, review
of the regulatory system for early childhood education is now largely been
concluded. Um,
we've recently, uh, gazetted new licensing criteria that follow on
from that review.
Question from Adam.
And, um, obviously there's a, um, a significant
shift, uh, to come in the form of the transfer of the
Ministry's regulatory functions to the Education Review Office,
pending, um, you know, the legislative program that's, um,
currently before the House. And so, um, those
changes taken together are designed to increase the quality
of ECE regulation, to provide services with a clearer
understanding of the criteria that they need to meet, and,
um, a, a stronger, um, relationship with the
regulator that has a range of graduated interventions
available for it to use. And so that's a role that ERO will be taking on.
Yeah. Um, so just supplementary questions.
Uh, I've got a couple, um, Chair.
(clears throat)
The first of, the, one of the things you mentioned in terms of Te Whariki and the
tools that's available, that's great.
But what we're seeing is-
Mm-hmm.
... that not all ECE centers, and particularly, you know, there's
disproportionate amount of qualified teachers
within that. So I'm guessing that for qualified teachers, I have no
issues, I'm assured that there's access to that.
Mm-hmm.
But what about the non-qualified, um, staff in
ECE centers? Would they also have access to...
Are they also-
... expected to meet that?
Um, both, they both, they both have-
Okay.
... um, they both have access to. And
irrespective of the type of service, um, we, we are
expecting that, um, they are using Te Whariki as the basis of
their program. And that the tools support the, uh, teachers, qualified or
unqualified, um, to practice, um,
they, they build their practice and, and provide the best programs for our young
people.
Um, just two final stops, Chair. One of them is around the licensing
criteria that you just mentioned.
One of the things that I did notice, I'm glad to see that the
sleep checks are still back in. But one of the things that is no longer al-
um, in there is that services no longer need a
philosophy statement. And I just wanna check with you on some of the rationales
behind some of the value-based statements that you, we normally expect to see in
licensing criteria.
So, um, the licensing criteria have a range of purposes.
Obviously, the primary purpose of most of the criteria is the health, safety, and
wellbeing of children, and that, um, is a substantial proportion of the
98 or so criteria that, that predated the regulatory
review. Um, there are a number of criteria that relate to the
curriculum and its implementation, and obviously that connects to the
conversation that, that you were just having with Pauline.
Um, and then there are a small number of other criteria that relate to things like
the, the purpose and nature of the organization and its governance.
One of the things that the regulatory review found was that
requiring a center to have a philosophy statement was not
the sort of thing that was appropriate for a regulatory policy
instrument.
Okay.
So obviously, if a center wants to appeal to a particular parent community through
a statement about what its purpose is, that's absolutely appropriate for
it, and you'll have, um, uh, you know, networks
like Montessori, for example, which have very clear educational
philosophy. But, um, for most ECE
services, requiring by law that they
publish a philosophy statement is not something that the Ministry for Regulation
found was contributing to the wellbeing, safety, or educational outcomes
for children, so...
Final question, because you mentioned regulation.
There's gonna be the new Director of Regulation.
Mm-hmm.
One of the things we couldn't get clarity on was how that interact with you.
I know that as secretary, you're the ones who appoint that.
Mm-hmm.
But the clarification we're trying to get is the organizational chart of how that
is going to sit. So the example that we used previously is in the current
situation, and we'll talk about later-
Mm-hmm.
... that the person who is fronting on all that was the Deputy Secretary of
Operations. But then if now some of that sits under Director
of Regulations-
Mm-hmm.
... so how does that-
Mm-hmm. ... directorship sits across with the deputy secretary level,
Andy, like yourself and Pauline?
Sure. The important thing with the Director of Regulation is it's
someone who holds that office. They can have a-another
substantive job, but they hold that office and are clear about their role
as the regulator.
Mm-hmm.
So I will be appointing someone to be the Director of
Regulation
should the legislation pass.
Yeah.
Uh, and that will sit within our current Operations and Integration shop,
noting, uh, that I have announced a change to the
Ministry's leadership structure, which comes into play at the beginning of
March next year, where I'm bringing the operational arms closer
together.
Okay, thank you very much. Um, Parmjeet, your side.
Thank you. So with the update of, uh, the ECE
licensing criteria, uh, that is going to come-
(coughs)
... into effect next year, um, just want to know how you're gearing up
for that, and what does that involve, um, at your end and how you are
ensuring that everybody, the sector is kind of ready for that?
Mm-hmm. So at the moment, we're busy creating, um,
guidance, guidelines, templates, a range of
materials that both my staff can use but also can be
provided out to the sector. We are doing that
in concert with ERO, recognizing that there is
currently, uh, a bill, which I think is before this
committee-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, which is considering transferring those functions through to ERO.
So we're getting ready for, um, the graduated,
uh, interventions and for the licensing criteria with
training, with guidance, with guidelines, with complaints.
Good.
Okay. Uh,
Jan.
Thank you. Thank you, and I'll offer my congratulations too, Ellen.
That's wonderful news. Um,
in the early learning space, and I'm only here for 20 minutes, so I'm going to
take the opportunity to ask about financials in early learning.
And on page 171 of the annual
report, it talks about early learning education as being
$211 million underspent, mainly due to
$173 million of funding approved in the
budget to manage risk associated with demand-driven forecasting
of early learning subsidies being not required.
That's a heck of a big, um, difference there,
$173 million.
Yeah.
Why do you think that has happened, that we don't have those,
um, the underspend and the funded child hours there?
Uh, so our demand-driven appropriation for early learning is based on forecasts
around s- um, child numbers and child
hours. Um, in the
last financial year, the '23/'24,
we've reached that appropriation because we under forecast
the number of places needed, the number of hours needed.
It is quite an art to forecast, uh, early
learning, uh, volume,
um, the volume and places. It sort
of depends on a range of factors,
immigration, job markets, parental decisions.
So for the more recent, uh, budget round, we're a little bit more
conservative in our forecasts to avoid
breaching our appropriations. Uh, but it doesn't
reflect, uh, an underspend in terms of
children not receiving service they should or families
not receiving subsidies they should.
I guess I'm more interested in that respect around the fact, do, do you do the
work, um, and I'm assuming you do, but I want to sort
of-
Mm-hmm.
... sort of get into it a bit more granular around
where are those children not turning up? What types of services?
Do you do that sort of work around the, the, um,
demographics that we're not seeing turning up?
Like, I, I get that it's a very hard job to do the
forecasting-
(laughs) But-
... what, what sort of demographics are using the services more
than others?
Sure. Um, in terms of our forecast, we use overall
population figures. Um, and happy to provide the
committee with details of how we do our forecasting.
Uh, we do track, uh, ECE attendance and
uptake, and we can provide the committee with a breakdown
of, of where we see different, uh, population-...
groups in terms of their use of ECE, uh, and where there
are, there are areas of higher demand and lower
demand.
Um, one
Do you want that, do you want that-
Yes, I do. That would be very helpful.
... recorded?
Thank you. Yeah. Yes, very helpful. Um, one more question.
So, there was 173 million dollars, which you've explained in the annual
report-
Mm-hmm.
... but that means there's still 38 million dollars underspend.
Where does that, what's covered by that 38 million dollars?
Mm-hmm. Sorry, which, uh-
Uh, page 171.
Of the annual report?
Um, it's 171 on the online version.
I haven't got-
Oh, okay.
... a hard copy in front of me.
All right. Um, sorry, I'll just try and find it in the
hard copy.
Yeah. If I had the hard copy in front of me, which I don't.
(clears throat)
Yeah.
Yes, my apologies. I'm in 171 in my copy.
I'm on, I'm on, um, adult education.
Yeah, no. Thank you.
They do, they do do a bit different.
(laughs)
Yes, they do. Um, I can't actually find the-
Yeah, maybe w- we'll give-
... statement you're
on. ... we'll, we'll
put that as either a come back to, or if you find it, in the meantime, we'll-
Oh, it's 174.
... in the hard copy.
174 in the non-departmental, departmental output
expenses. Early learning education
was 211,
seven% under budget.
7% under budget due to 173 of funding approved to manage the
demand-driven appropriation.
So, that still leaves 38 million-
Underspend.
... underspent. I was just wondering what that was.
So, I'll anticipate if I have resulting underspend of funded child hours, I'll have
to come back to you on the residual-
Okay. That would be super helpful. Thank you.
We'll put that as a, um, follow-up question.
Yeah. Thanks, Mike.
Um, Chana.
(speaks Te Reo Māori)
Um,
thank
you so much, uh, for, um, being here today.
Um, my questions in (speaks Te Reo Māori) are just around early
childhood education ref- reform.
Uh, the annual report referred to ECE reform and the
implementation of recommendations from the government's review of ECE
regulation oversight, and a new director of regulations.
My (speaks Te Reo Māori) is just around how has the WAI claim
2336 Matua Rautia report on the Kohanga Reo
claim informed implementations of
recommendations, if at all.
Uh, the ECE regulations... Andy, you'll correct me if I'm
wrong. I, I don't think, uh, impacting through
into Kohanga Reo in the same way.
Uh, they, uh... So that's, uh, they're excluded from the funding review but-
Yes.
Okay. ... they are subject to the, the regulatory changes.
Okay.
Yeah. Um, yeah. So, I mean, we work very closely with Kohanga Reo.
Um, the result of that, uh, tribunal claim has been that we've
had a very strong, um, partnership relationship with them-
Yeah.
... uh, that's worked over successive governments, um, in terms of things like
changes to their funding model-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and changes to the way in which we fund property for Kohanga
Reo. Um, we've, uh, the, both the Ministry for
Regulation and ourselves kept very close to Kohanga through that
relationship during the regulatory review and, and subsequent
to it. Uh, and we've ensured that they were v- you know, fully across any
of the changes that have been taking place and were fully consulted through that
process. I'm not aware of any particular concerns that Kohanga
have-
Okay.
Fine. ... expressed to us in relation to the regulatory review.
Um, and, um, obviously if that's, if that...
I'm not across a- e- all of the consultation responses-
Mm-hmm.
... um, but I'm not aware of any particularly significant concerns that they've
expressed.
Cool. Cool. Um, just supplementaring off that.
Um, how will the Ministry deal with the regulatory challenges faced by
Kohanga, both as a part of the government's recent review of ECE, and
as a part of the Kohanga Reo's independent trey claim?
Um, so I think the
m- main, uh, way in which we'll do that is
by seeking to, uh, preserve and enhance
the quality of our ongoing relationship with them.
Um, I, I, I think, I think that will mean we can both keep
across changes as they're rolled out and we'll be certainly wanting to understand
their experience of the changes in the regulatory review.
So-
Cool.
... yeah. Thank you.
Um, while we're talking about regulatory review in early childhood,
since the September 2022
report, uh, by ERO on recommendations to enhance
initial, um, teacher education on teaching disabled
children in early, uh, learning settings,
what work, um, has the Ministry undertaken to address
that?
We've undertaken a range of work, both around initial teacher
education, um,
in terms of understanding the quality of that ITE, how well it's
preparing teachers, both the early learning and schooling
to, to enter the setting or the service.
Um, we continually work with a range of, um,
disability
sector, um, representatives and providers to
understand, uh, what more needs to be done and should be done, and
provide guidance through to, through to teachers and through to
services.
Ha- have you had any, um, update from ERO on that
report and that implementation that you're aware of, or any
quality check internally that you've done to give a sense of whether that has
worked and addressed those recommendations?
I'm not aware of an ERO follow-up yet.
Uh, but generally, we have a process in place where ERO will follow up after
a period of time.
Okay. Great. Uh,
Lawrence.
Thank you. Um, just actually picking up from what the chair
has said, um, this might not be something that,
uh, mm, MOE funds, but can you just first of all clarify who
funds the, um, education support worker hours?...
for ECE infants, students under four and a half.
No, the early intervention teachers?
Not... The early intervention teachers, yeah.
Mm-hmm.
And, yep, so that's something that you fund. And as well as the ESW hours?
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah. Can I just check, so recently, it's been reported on
that the,
there's been a tightening of some of the criteria and now s-
for students, for kids in ECE-
Yes.
... they're now getting up to five hours a
week, and how that five hours is being used-
Mm-hmm.
... is very much ad hoc. Sometimes the one hour that they get a day is
during nap time, where the students may not need it.
Can I just check, in terms of whether there's been any sort of, uh,
funding change or how that funding has been-
Mm-hmm.
... been calculated?
I'm, I'm not aware of a funding change, but Helen's coming to the
table-
(laughs)
Um, and she may
be aware of the change.
Kia ora. Helen Hurst, um, I'm the acting deputy secretary for
operations and integration at the Ministry.
Yeah.
Um, so there's a range of different, um,
support worker allowances that, um, are very much based on
need. So, we haven't made any funding changes.
Um, we continually look at, at, um, the
resource that we have available and match that to need, but there is not a, a
funding change.
Can I just check, what is the maximum number of hours, um, a s- a child
can get for ESW?
It, it will depend on their need, so, uh, uh, and, and how many
hours they attend.
So, there is no maximum? So, they could get 20 hours.
Potentially.
If that's what they need. Absolutely.
Interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
'Cause I don't think that has been communicated because I
think there, when people have applied they have been told that
there is a maximum and there is a cap.
But what you're saying that there isn't one?
The- there will be a cap in terms of the r- the r- staffing available.
So, there may need to be some-
Ah.
... decisions made practically around that in different locations.
But, um, generally the, the assessment is
based on the need of the child.
Okay. One final question on this, which is
if the s- the staffing capacity is an issue, have you actually heard
if, if s- kids are getting fewer hours because
there's not enough staff?
It's not something I'm aware of.
Okay. Cool.
Okay. Uh, that's a nice end to part one.
And we're gonna move to, uh, part two.
We're moving.
Primary and secondary, um, schooling.
We've got an hour for this section.
Um,
Lauren (laughs) 'cause...
Ooh.
Question, yeah.
Excellent. You have to be, you have to get in there.
(laughs)
Um, we're gonna start with in terms of some of the, the reasons and probably the
most topical issue right now-
Mm-hmm.
... which is, what was ME's, MOE's role and consultation
process around the removal of Te Tiriti o Waitangi from section
127 of the Education and Training Act?
Uh, so, um, w- our advice has been
proactively released, um, if you would like to-
What did it say?
So, what it said was that, um,
we thought the government should consult, um, before making changes to
legislation. Um, but that is ultimately a decision for
cabinets to make. Um, we noted that
changing section 127, um,
uh, would likely be controversial and at a time
when there is a lot of important work occurring.
Um, ultimately, as you'll see from the proactive
releases, um, ministers also had
advice from, uh, the Treaty References
Review Group and cabinets
get advice from a range of sources,
which noted that, um,
cabinet should consider or may want to consider whether it's appropriate
for boards of trustees, given that they are entities a
number of steps removed from the Crown, to have
the obligation of the Crown to give effect to Te
Tiriti. However, the decision that was made was that section
127 still needs to have boards provide
equitable outcomes for Maori students, uh, which is
fundamental. Uh, that they need to take steps for te reo
Maori to be provided. And they need to take reasonable steps to reflect
cultural diversity in Te Ao Maori.
So, important elements, uh, that MOE
advised should be retained were retained.
Okay.
So, uh, we'll take a couple of sups, but if it's, if we're gonna focus
on stuff that's already in the public domain, then there are other things that
we need to focus on, in terms of the review,
Well, I mean, all of it's in the public domain.
Anything we're referring to-
Well, so let's ask-
Yeah.
... questions that are either gonna be additive-
... um, or we'll move on.
No, sure.
Lauren?
Um, fair point, Chair. Thank you. I guess, um, the, the follow-up
question around that is thank you for highlighting some of that.
Um, is then one of the other things
that's removed that was also not just simply Te Tiriti o Waitangi and you mentioned
in terms of equitable outcomes. But one of the other things that has been removed
from that is taking into consideration Tikanga Maori and, uh,
local mataranga Maori-
Mm-hmm.
... from that as a whole package. Um, I was wondering if that is also
something that you have given advice on, not simply just the Te Tiriti part, but
also the other part? And I guess a second part to that question
is, um, do you know of any jurisdictions
overseas where an official language of a
country is optional for people to learn, sure,
but it's written in a way that is only
available if someone asks? Does that make
sense in terms of the
law? Yes, it does.
Okay. So, the first part of your question, sorry, I lost the
first part. Was around the, the, the removal of Tikanga Maori and local mataranga
Maori from that whole package as well, not just simply the
Te Tiriti- Mm-hmm. Did you want to say something Andrew?
Oh, uh, yes, I mean, our advice also recommended-
Okay.
... the retention of reference in particular to Tikanga Maori-
Yeah.
... uh, in schools. Um, and so
that's-... the answer to the, the first part of your question, I think.
I, I do think, um, though, in terms
of, um, what I'm seeing is clearly the choice
is still there for schools, and schools will still be
using that choice, and in fact, we expect them to do so.
Right. And the second part?
I'm gonna go to... Oh, sorry. Yeah, there was a second part regarding the
international part.
Oh, the second part, the international.
Um-
Yeah. In terms of official languages, that's only available u- upon
request and not naturally available, but off- optional for people to
take.
I am not myself fully across all jurisdictions and their official
languages. I don't know, Angie, if you are. We can come back to you on that.
That'd be great, yeah. Thank you.
Yes. Yes.
I think only come back if it's advice that, that you looked at.
Otherwise, it's a great question for the library.
Oh, yeah. Yes, yes.
Okay.
Absolutely. Let, let, let's leave...
Don't worry about having to investigate.
Okay.
Yes. (laughs)
Only if you, only if there was advice.
Otherwise, that's a good question for the library.
Yes.
Pamjit?
Yeah. So, in regards to this, uh, question, just want to understand from you, when
a school board, uh, adopts a political
position without consulting with the parent body, what
options, uh, in your view parents, um, have to
hold them to account?
(sighs) Well, ultimately, um, schools are
part of the wider-
Mm-hmm. ... uh, government. Uh, we, uh, do
expect teachers to, um, not express
political views within the classroom or, um, unduly
influence children. Ultimately, boards of trustees
are, you know, elected members from local
communities.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I think if parents aren't happy with the performance of
their school board, um, that is something for parents to raise with their
board. Uh, and the Ministry will become involved where relationships
break down.
Thanks, and just for-
Can I... Just before your next up, Pamjit-
Yep.
Just before your next, for everyone-
Yep. ... if we're not asking about the Ministry's activity, I'm going to move us on.
Like, 'cause otherwise we're just asking general questions that we can go and
research in the library. So, let's get back to the annual review and
questions-
Yeah,
so- ... in the period. Pamjit.
Yeah. So then, what proportion of school boards have a
majority of seats, uh, being reserved for parent elected members,
because they're teacher elected and staff, principal, everybody.
So, I'm just thinking what kind of influence, as you were saying, the elections
have.
Uh, so you have a principal member, a staff member, a student member, and
then a-
Minimum three.
... m- yeah, I was gonna say a minimum of three elected.
So, half the board-
So, do you know if there are any reserve, like maj- how many schools would have
like majority of members as parents?
No.
Those are parents.
Yeah.
Another good question for the library.
I think most school boards would.
Mm.
Um, most school, schools will have majority parents?
Mm...
Okay. Thanks, Pamjit.
Let me just get just-
No, that's all
right. ... the thinking.
I wanna... I'm, I'm, I've got to be consistent across everyone.
I just think it's very important they are trans-
It's a great question for the library. Hannah.
No, Mr. Chair, all questions can be put to the
library. No, all done.
Mr. Chair?
Not all questions can.
No, Mr. Chair, point of order.
Mm.
They were still in the thinking process, and I think they were just about to
finish the word saying most, and I was getting that confirmation when you
interrupted.
Pamjit.
I
just want- I've been consistent with everyone.
I'll let, I'll let Alan answer that, and then we're moving
on.
I, I think most do.
Mm.
But we second that.
Okay.
If it is what she said, Pamjit. Yes.
Yes. Right. I think we're... Look, we're going to move on from this topic, so I'll
move to the next, um, primary. Willow-Jean, if you've got a...
Your, your next primary? On a new topic, primary.
Oh,
sorry. (clears throat) Primary Lawrence, new topic.
(laughs) Got to be quick.
(laughs)
Um, I want to talk about, I, I guess, learning support.
Um, so I know that... So this particularly part two, I know we're going to spend a
lot of time, and there are quite a few things to cover.
So one of the things that we know that is, um,
Kahui Akos being sort of removed, uh, and the last time
we checked, RTM and RT Lit are- We're going to have them. ...
finishing at the end of this year. Um,
in... There's been an announcement being made, and yeah, I see that,
uh, LSCs are going to be implemented next
year, starting from term one.
That's right.
Um, some LSCs are already there.
Mm-hmm.
But I wondered if MOE has provided any advice or
has, um, any information
around... Okay. So, LSCs, the
announcement is every school will have access to LSC.
Mm-hmm.
But then that is at the end of the three years. So, in...
But what we do then see is a vacuum in which RTMs
and RT Lits and Kahui Akos are no longer available, and
LSCs are not going to be in every single schools.
In terms of the preparation work done by MOE-
Mm-hmm.
... what advice have you been given, or what information do you have
on schools managing a lack of
LSC in this transitional period, but at the same time has already
lost RTM and RT Lit?
Okay. And in terms of LSCs, um,
more schools will have LSCs than currently have LSCs.
So, we're not removing an LSC from a school.
So just-
That's not what... Yep, just-
Yep.
In terms of RTMs and RT Lits, for
RT Lits, at the same time as those were
removed, we have surged a massive amount of resource and
support into literacy
and into numeracy, including new FTTE
for schools. Pauline can provide all the numbers on-
That's helpful.
... oh, and if Pauline would like to come to the table on those
FPTT... FTTE-
Yeah.
... around RT Lit. Uh, RTMs were for Te Reo
Maori, not for learning support. Uh,
and, uh, as was
announced at the time, the coverage of the RTMs was
mixed. Not everyone accessed them-
Mm.
... and decisions were made in budget to reallocate the money, so there was a
fairer spread of support for-...
Maori. So, my expectation and my advice is
schools, while some schools may have had an RT-Lit, um, that
they had just to themselves, um, more schools
now have access to literacy support,
both at the universal level
with all of the in-class teaching resources-
Mm.
... teaching practices, and we have additional
FTTE-
Mm.
... to support literacy. But Pauline, do you want to run through the numbers?
Yep. So, um, before, uh, the disestablishment
of the, uh, T-Lits, um, 970
schools were getting FTTE to support their
literacy interventions, so that is providing that support for students
who need additional learning support in literacy.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we are currently, with the additional FTE, looking to provide
that, that FTE to 1,241
schools, uh, in, from the start of next year.
We've also, of course, uh, added
143 FTE-
Mm-hmm.
... for mathematics support, um, that will be allocated out into
schools. We haven't quite finished that allocation
yet, um, and I'd be able to confirm those numbers when we have.
That'd be helpful. Um, just supplementary on the sort of the Learning Access
Package. Um, one of the things we saw is that every
child that is eligible for ORS will be, will have that
ORS funding, but we're still hearing that, um, there's still a
bottleneck in terms of application and access into the ORS structure.
Can I just check if you are able to confirm that every child who have,
able to get ORS funding have received ORS funding?
We have been tracking the ORS applications and approval
rates. Can, can confirm they have been tracking up.
So, while the criteria for ORS have not changed-
Yes.
... we are making a lot of headway through ORS applications
and more children now are receiving ORS funding.
That's really good to hear, but I think the specific is that every
child, um, was the, what was being referred to.
So, when you say it's tracking up, are we still not quite at the stage of every
child who have access or who's eligible?
Every child who is eligible will receive ORS funding.
Oh, okay. Cool. And, um-
So-
... just final question. Um-
Final one.
Sorry, final question. What's the average wait time between an ORS
application and actually receiving the decision of
ORS?
You, Helen?
So, it's sitting at, uh, about two weeks at the
moment. From application to... Wow.
From- Can I a- ask a sup on that?
Can you give us a sense of the history of
the time it took for an ORS application-
Mm.
... to be processed and approved in the past?
Because that was a significant pain point-
Yep. ... that I heard in going into schools-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
... across the Whanganui electorate.
Mm-hmm.
And it, indications are that it's changing, which is what you've
indicated to us. But I'd love to get a sense of what the
historical, uh, timeframes were and what they are
now being at two weeks.
While Helen pulls up the timeframes, I will also note that
historical pain point was at, was not a demand-driven
appropriation-
Mm, that's
right. ... so we would hit the point where we would need to
ration-
Yeah.
... applications. But Helen?
Um, so the latest information around wait times, but
this, this must be from the point that the application is received in full, would
be, my understanding is 10.58 days.
But looking back?
Looking back, um, last year that was sitting at
15.78 days, um, and-
It's gone as high as 22 days.
Oh, 22 days, 22 days is the performance target.
So, I think-
So, so given that was our performance target, was 22 days-
Mm-hmm.
... um, we'll go back and look at all of our records, but it will have gone
higher than 22 days.
One- We'll, um, we'll put that as a follow-up question.
And I think if possible, it would be interesting to understand from
point of receipt-
Mm-hmm.
... because certainly what I heard, um-
That's
right, yes. ... was that it was significantly longer-
Month-long-
... than, than 22 days.
I can speak to that, yeah.
Mm-hmm. Andrea?
Yeah.
I can speak to that. Andrea Williams, I'm the acting deputy secretary for Southern-
Mm-hmm.
Um, so what I can tell you is we had a period of time, that I think you're alluding
to, where the wait time from submission of application
to processing that-
Mm. ... to determine whether the child met the criteria or not, uh, was
quite high. It got over 60, about 60 days.
We have reduced that at the moment to 30, about 35
days at the moment.
Oh, okay.
Um, so that is reducing and we've put-
That's
helpful. ... additional resource in, um-
So, you've more, you- you've just up, just under halved the wait time
and it's on the downward trend?
It's on the downward trajectory, and we should be seeing people-
Outstanding?
... getting their verification sooner than-
Right.
... there was a period.
Uh, supplementary from Grant.
Y- yeah, just quick supplement on, sorry if I missed it, but the numbers that
you, that you're now getting in ORS versus what you've
had.
For actual numbers of applications?
Actual numbers of, of, of people who've successfully become resident-
So, those numbers are higher. Um-
Okay.
You might have them with you, Helen, you may not.
Uh, but we're also getting more applications-
Yeah.
... and we're getting more applications, because
I think previously-
People just-
... people-
Didn't bother.
... people knew-
Okay.
... that there was potentially a cap, and, and didn't bother, so now we're seeing
those applications come through.
So, what's your... Well, so give us an idea for when you had the cap, what was your
last sort of cap-out rate? And then where it's gone-
Mm.
... what, to now, would be very helpful.
I have seen the delta. I don't know if you brought it with you.
I haven't got the delta with me. But, um, in, in
2023-'24, it was
6,903. Um, '24, '25
it was sitting at, um, 7,564.
And it's gone up since then.
And it's gone up since then, and as a proportion as well.
So, we're continuing to see that.
Can you give those, um, two numbers again,
Those numbers again? So, '23, '24,
6,903.
... and in 2024, '25,
7,564.
And we do have m- more recent data, which I've seen-
Yeah.
... which
has a slightly greater delta.
And-
Just-
Right. Yeah, final thought.
Final s- final summary. I suppose you've got, really got no idea about where this
could go to, you, it being a demand-driven-
(coughs)
... situation, you're just going to ha- monitor it and see what happens?
Is that basically how you're approaching it?
Um-
That's a good-
Yes. (laughs) I mean, we, we do see, um, indications
of need growing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so we, we do expect to see
some growth in this appropriation.
Um, the key is whether or not the criteria are changed.
Okay, yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
Um, so we're going to a new primary, um, from Mike Butterick, and-
Uh, thank you.
... he's your next.
Thank you, Chair. I just wanted to, um, ask about the introduction of structured
math and literacy, um, how much
investment-
(clears throat)
... has been made. Um, there's three parts to it, and has it met
your expectations? What have the results been?
Uh,
the results have, um,
exceeded my expectations.
Uh, we'd been working for some time on, uh,
structured literacy as an approach.
Uh, we had identified for some time we had issues in mathematics
teaching. Uh, the investment that has been made in
recent years-
Good night.
... uh, has outstripped my expectations in terms of what we are now seeing coming
through for children. Uh, while there's been, I know, some questioning around our
phonics results and our maths trials, uh, they really
are a true testament to some amazing work by teachers and great results from
kids. Pauline, in terms of the investment and the actual figures?
Uh, I don't have them in front of me.
Okay, while you're pulling those through-
Yeah.
... uh, I was also really pleased to get AERO's report
on, uh, the implementation of that investment.
It is, I think, the nicest thing AERO's ever written-
(laughs)
... about the Ministry of Education-
(laughs) (laughs)
... and anything we've ever implemented-
(laughs)
(laughs) ... um, (laughs) which I do not take, I do not take
lightly. So my overall comment, uh, would be I'm
absolutely thrilled for children.
I'm absolutely thrilled with the results we're starting to see from the investment.
If you just want to talk through the results, Pauline.
Um, yeah, so we have, uh, of course, the very early, ve-
very early but encouraging results coming through.
We have phonics data from students as they finished their first 20
weeks at school. So in February, we had our first
cohort of students who had, um, had 20 weeks
at school and we saw that 38% of those students
were at the expected level, um, after 20-
36. ... weeks at school. When we looked at the cohort in term three of
students that were, um, had, had had their 20
weeks at school, that had risen to 58%.
And what that shows us is that, as teachers have, um, and over
33,000 teachers have, started their training in structured literacy and
become confident in those practices, that that's directly having an
impact on students attaining those, those early
reading skills around phonics. Phonics is just one part of reading, but it's a
really and critical part of being able to, um,
build and grow later literacy skills such as building your vocabulary and
comprehension. And so the- those early indicators that we've seen in the
data are encouraging. They're encouraging because,
uh, they also show that the, the gains for
Maori, the gains for Pacific, uh, are there as well.
Um, and so
we've looked at our maths, um, maths
trial for year seven and eights. Uh, year seven and eights was an area
we identified as needing, uh, to focus on, uh,
given the results of the CIPS data, the Curriculum
Insights Data, showing that around 32%
of year eights were at curriculum level.
Uh, and, and also coupled with the fact that we knew many young people were
still struggling to reach their co-requisite in NCEA for
maths. Uh, this focus on four aspects of number, number being
that critical component to being able to, uh, progress in maths
learning, but also the maths that comes into other subjects as you move through
your schooling, um, has been very successful.
We trialed three approaches. We trialed the approach, um,
of, uh, students in small groups working with a teacher,
uh, an approach of students using an online tool to practice and develop new,
those skills, uh, and also, um, a hybrid approach
where s- there was a bit of, uh, online work and a bit of targeted
teaching by the students. By far, the, the quality
teaching, um, of the in front of a teacher had the
best result. And on those four aspects, um, we designed
an assessment based on the program using our EASTL tool
to be able to see what the pre- what their pre-data was and what their post-data
was, and that, and they showed significant growth over their 12-week
intervention, um, up to two years, uh, for those
in, in-person groups, and around a year, uh, for those other
groups of students and the control group.
What that tells us is that in that 12-week time, young people,
uh, the programs were able to have a real impact on accelerating the learning of
those young people. We're, we know that we wanna make sure that's
retained and so we've got a further measurement coming up this term to see
how those kids have retained that knowledge and whether any further intervention
would be needed and we want to monitor them again, uh, next year to see that that's
been retained.
Anecdotally something, sorry, that I'm also very excited about is I'm getting
reports in of, uh, children telling their teachers
and others in the community that their favorite thing about school is maths.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, like-
(laughs)
Ooh. (laughs)
(laughs) (laughs) (laughs) (laughs) That's a big-
(laughs)
That's a big thing for this country.
Yeah, yeah. It is. (laughs)
And I guess just on that-
Yeah.
... we had AERO obviously here fairly recently-
... and, um, just to echo the words that you've used and that they used as well was
transformational.
Mm-hmm.
... and the biggest change-
Groundbreaking.
... that they've seen over a long, long period of time.
So I think big, um, congratulations to everyone that, that is involved because
it is-
Question? ... nothing short of extraordinary, the turnaround. It's just a follow-up to that.
So-
Oh.
Ladies.
Thanks.
(Chuckles) Kia ora, thank you. Um,
just on that last answer, you said, "We
designed." Uh, the minister the other day said it wasn't the minister who designed
it, or the ministry who designed it, it was psychometricians that
designed it.
Who were the psychometricians that designed it?
Uh, we contract, um, a range of psychometricians to work with us on
various projects, um, and they...
Un- un- oh, sorry. So when I say "we," under our contract, um, with
them, they designed those, uh, those assessments for us-
So who was-
... based on the program. I don't have-
P-
... their actual names, sorry.
But you can get that for us?
I can get us names,
And that's public knowledge? That's... Happy for that to be public knowledge?
I would just need to check on
that. Just check on that before you just give it to us.
Yes, yes. Yeah.
Yeah. And happy
We would just need to check with the psychometricians themselves-
Metrix themselves-
... whether they have a particular-
Yeah, yeah.
... issue with
the program. We're not, we're not worried, but...
Okay. Well, we'll check that and then we can come back.
Have you got another sup?
Yep.
Do.
Um, also, the question is around the, um, peer review
of the, this report that you've put out-
Mm-hmm.
... when I understand it wasn't a final report.
Uh, it was an interim report, still to get the final one-
Yeah.
... later this year. Um, and is it your intention to have that report
peer-reviewed?
So we have, we have an independent evaluator doing the report for
us, and then we have internal, uh, ministry analysts peer review.
Um, I haven't any intention at the moment to get that further peer
reviewed. Um, I think, uh, we have every confidence, uh, that
the independent evaluators are doing a great job for us, uh, and our
ana-analysts internally, um, are removed from the project.
Who is the independent evaluator?
Um, it's Evaluation Associates.
Okay. Um, Lawrence, your sup?
Oh, just a sup. Um, it's really good to see some of the, the results
actually are coming out for both literacy and numeracy.
But one of the things that I w- I was curious about is-
Mm-hmm.
... the data that came out for phonics, 'cause when we asked Eric as well, Eric's
like-
Mm-hmm.
... "Well, we only have the ability to track one part of it out of
six, which is phonics." And then the same thing with math, only one out of the six
areas were tracked. I'm more kind of questioned about, well, in that
case, how then are you able to get a holistic view of how the
program is working overall when only
one-sixth-
Mm-hmm.
... you know, is being tracked, so 16%?
Maths.
(laughs) So, so if I take maths, um, we were looking at, um, four aspects of
number, which is fundamental for accessing the rest of
mathematics. Alongside that, we will continue to have
the CIPS, the Curriculum Insights and Progress Study, which is telling us
overall how things are tracking.
Yeah.
And then from next year we will have, uh, the twice yearly
assessment based-
Mm-hmm.
... on the curriculum, which will give us an overall system view,
teachers a classroom view, parents a child view.
Uh, and then if we come over into the overall componentry of literacy,
as, as Pauline mentioned, uh, phonics is a fundamental
for accessing the wider, uh, literacy disciplines alongside
orality, uh, and we are looking at an early
orality check. Uh, and that will
be supplemented, of course, also with the CIPS data, also with the
twice yearly assessment. Uh, we are moving to a system
which will actually provide, I think, the information this committee has
been looking for, that the OAG has asked for, in terms of what
is actually happening for our children before they hit NCEA.
Okay. Um, going to Grant McCallum, sup?
Yeah. I've got, um, a couple of sups there, Mr. Chair, if you don't mind.
First one is around the, um, uh, the particularly
small rural schools and how... And wh- it's been indicated that
they've-
Do you want to go?
... th- they've had challenges in, in this space in terms of implementing-
Mm-hmm.
... and, and so forth. How have you found that? What, what's your data showing?
And then, yeah, please.
Mm-hmm. We've been working really closely with the, um, Rural
Schools Association, um, and they have been fantastic helping us to
find solutions that are going to work for their schools and communities.
Um, if I take the recent, um, budget announcements around
LSCs and other staffing, uh, we spent quite a bit of time, um,
with the Rural Principals Association on how can we make this
work so where they're getting bits of a roll, right?
Or they don't have-
Mm-hmm.
... all the people in their community they can club together, and they can find
those solutions that work for them.
In terms of the curriculum rollout, uh, we've also worked with-
Okay. ... the rural associations, uh, in terms of how do we get the PLD
into them and their teachers.
Yeah.
Some of it has been hybrid, some of it we've, we've driven or
flown people into-
Yeah.
... those spaces-
Yes.
... um, and freed up, um, those, uh, small school
teachers or teaching principals to undertake the work.
So we've had a very close and productive relationship with the Rural Principals
Network, uh, to find those solutions.
It's not always easy-
Yeah.
... and they do have to be a bit different-
... but I think we've, we've had pretty good reach.
I don't know, Pauline, if you've had anything you want to add?
No, I, I think that's right. I mean, we have seen, um, with the structured
literacy, the hybrid model seem to work, uh, slightly
better, but for maths, um, finding the, one of...
You know, finding those whole days for, um, maths PLD has been a bit
more challenging. We are meeting with the association, as Alan says, at the moment
and looking, uh, to how that might happen.
But we've also changed our design so that they can modulize the PLD
and do components at staff meetings.
And we are working with our providers, uh, on, you know, to slightly adjust the
way we get them to operate so that they will travel, uh, to some of the more
isolated spaces. So some of that face-to-face, which is so important in the
professional learning and development does happen in those, in those communities.
And those relationships kind of establish with a provider-
... so that they can go on their improvement journey together.
Y- yeah, and just on for the sup- um, just another, you may have, in your comments
before you were talking about when we opened up this discussion around the
structured literacy and phonics, that you've been looking at it for some
time. So the que- curious, um, so I'm just curious as to
why it's taken s- so long to actually finally be introduced and with the
results we're getting. I mean, pretty spec- pretty spectacular.
In hindsight, um,
you know, we, we took a while working with people, working with the sector,
um, getting buy-in. Uh, my
reflection in hindsight is, uh,
while that worked, a short amount of
time in the life of an adult is a long time in the life of a child.
That's...
So that's my overall reflection, uh, is we need to get the right balance
between, um, getting changes to occur in the
classroom but making it, um, manageable for, for the teachers and
leaders.
Okay, that's good.
So on that point, sometimes we get, uh, when we're
out in our electorates, significant, um, pushback from some
teachers, not all teachers, uh, and some principals, not all
principals, about the speed at which, for example,
these two implementations occurred-
Yeah.
Yeah. ... um, is it
reasonable to take from your comment that, at the end of the
day, this worked, uh, and
therefore getting it done was the right thing-
The
child- ... for New Zealand, um-
... the kids.
... kids across the country?
For maths and literacy, yes.
With everything else though, yeah?
Well, I was asking about maths and literacy.
For maths and literacy, yes, it was the right decision.
And I think, I think our teaching profession have done themselves proud in how
they have-
Yeah, acknowledged.
... seized and implemented it.
Yeah. Great acknowledgement. Vanessa Wenig, sup?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so, but some of that curriculum insights
data, and, um,
we, has shown that there's some, you know, had been some concerns and that's part
of why we're, um, going through these changes, which is excellent.
Um, but also there's been, um, concerns about readiness for
school. Um, so this committee's interested, I think they're quite
interested in those transitions between-
Mm-hmm.
... um, preschool to primary school, primary school to secondary school, and then
again on to, um, tertiary and also lifelong
learning.
Mm-hmm. So, um, what kind of work,
um, is happening in those areas or in the Ministry
itself as an overall-
Mm-hmm.
... program of, um, sort of reflection and, and
policy development? Is that an area that you're looking at and
what can you share?
Mm-hmm. Um, thinking about the transition from early learning
or home if small children-
Mm-hmm.
... are at early learning, um, into school, um,
we have made sure that Te Whāriki, the curriculum
for, um, early learning
docks in seamlessly with the first years of the New Zealand
curriculum-
Mm-hmm.
... that we've been working on and drafting
so that you don't have this, this, um, big
disconnect between the two. We've continued to
improve and roll out our supports around social-emotional learning,
uh, into, um, ECE so we have the Enrich and
Engage programs, um, which
are focused on that social-emotional learning and self-regulation, which is, um,
important for that transition to school.
Uh, we have the Kōwhiri Whakapae programs, which Pauline spoke about earlier, which
are both around social-emotional learning, but really importantly oral C-
Mm-hmm.
... and early numeracy. We have quite a bit invested in
learning support in early learning,
and one of the things that Budget '25 has allowed
for is for early intervention support, which
starts in early learning to transition with the
child into the first year of their schooling.
Mm-hmm.
Which without that, I think has been quite a jarring
experience for some families-
Mm-hmm.
... and children. So that should offer a really big improvement.
Uh, Helen can talk a bit more about that.
In terms of the pathway through, through schooling, uh,
and into tertiary, we're really mindful
of those points in which children move from primary, primary/intermediate,
intermediate, secondary. I think teachers and school leaders are very
mindful of that. Uh, there's quite a lot of collaboration, there's quite a lot of
connection in terms of sharing of information about the children,
where they're at, uh, what needs to be provided for.
Uh, we continue as much as we are able through the
information we get, uh, to make sure that the supports we provide
continue for those children through.
I think one of the, the big potential game changes for
children-
Mm-hmm.
... will be that twice yearly assessment, which isn't-
... based only on overall teacher judgment because it will give
teachers a view
and children a view and parents a view of the progress children have made
and the supports they might need as they move through their different levels of,
of school. Um, going into tertiary,
uh, well, we can talk about the NCEA-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, change program, um, which is proposing to
have a range of, um, different pathways and subjects available for
young people, um, and to value, uh,
training and experiences above and beyond university-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, which
is great for some of us, not for, not for everyone else.
Uh, and, um,
and, and ultimately, you know, within schools, I
think there is a good focus for children on, on where,
where learning might lead them.I, I know there's committees I think had
Tertiary Education Commission in-
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
... and then they may have spoken to you-
Yes,
right. ... about the work they're doing around careers and, um-
Yes.
Yeah.
... the portal they're launching, which I think has a lot of potential as well.
So across the education system of central agencies,
we do work collectively and we do think quite deeply about those
different connection points for children and young people
throughout into-
Okay. Quick final sup on this and then we'll move on.
Yeah, just a quick one on that would be, um, if there were areas
that, um, that could be expanded or, um, that are working
well that could be used for different age groups?
I'm thinking like the wraparound, um, for the year
ones, um, ex- that was extended. Are there other
programs that could be, also be extended for, for support for other
era- other transitions or other times?
I, I think an area of interest for us will continue to be that
social-emotional learning and self-regulation and core skill acquisition-
Mm-hmm.
... for the littlies. And there is that emerging evidence coming through
around, um, the impact,
um, that lack of eye contact with an adult, lack of
just-
Yeah.
... being spoken to... (laughs)
... um, can have on the development of young people, which
will stick with them-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, for their lives. So I think that will continue to be an area, uh,
as a education system, but actually as a, as a country-
It's
a must, yeah. ... we're going to need to focus on.
Agree. Okay, Willow-Jean, new primary.
Thank you. Yup, new topic. I'd like to talk about, um,
curriculum. And in particular, I,
um, have seen a lot of concerns about the
minimizing of Te Reo Māori and mātauranga
Māori, um, and the reduction,
um, of that. And my question is, can you, hand on heart,
confirm that there were no verbal or written
instructions given to staff in any way, shape, or
form, to remove or use less Te Reo Māori and
references to Aotearoa?
I'm trying to think if I can...
From the Ministry.
No. I haven't...
It's illegal.
Sorry, anything you're saying from the Ministry, no, we haven't issued any
instructions in the Ministry to do that.
To staff?
To staff.
Okay. All right, thank you, that's the answer to that
question. Um, another-
Have you got another? Is there a sup?
Yep, I've got plenty of sups.
Oh, okay.
Yeah. Um, 'cause we're on curriculum, the big topic.
Yeah, yeah. Oh, just your other sups and if they're on that first part.
No, none.
Can you... No, I've got a few sups as well.
Okay.
Thank you. Uh, the other thing that, uh, we have heard is that this is
a curriculum that has been written, uh, by Kiwis for
Kiwis. And in particular, I want to know when did the Ministry
first engage the Australian company Learning
First?
Pauline, would you like to talk through the involvement of Learning First, uh,
when they were engaged and what they've actually done?
Mm-hmm. Um, Learning First, we engaged with Learning
First, um,
around
April this year from, from memory, sorry.
I'll, I'll, I'll confirm if I've got that wrong.
Um, Learning First we brought on board when we were starting to look at
making sure
as we selected the content and the, the sequence of learning, so
where to pitch the learning, at what year, year level to pitch the learning.
They would help us look at, um, how other countries, uh,
were benchmarking their curriculum, uh, so that we could be sure we
were, uh, being aspirational, as aspirational for our
students as other countries were being.
And were able to sequence the learning in ways that would mean
students, uh, had a really good opportunity to build on
their prior learning, uh, master new concepts, and then get a chance
to practice and use that new learning in wide and varied more
complex, uh, context. So, we used, uh,
Learner First for that. We also used the Learner First to help us,
um, make sure that-
Is it Luna or Learning?
Oh, the Learner, sorry. The Learner, Learner First.
Learner First. Learner First. Learning First?
Uh, I think it's Learning First.
Learner First, sorry. There's two companies with one name, one's not involved at
all. Sorry, confusion. Um,
they, uh, also helped us, uh, with getting
the language of the curriculum specific and clear, um, in,
in relation to how we wanted to make sure the knowledge rich
framing of the curriculum, uh, was clear and explicit for
teachers about what students needed to know, do, and be, and
understand. And, uh, we had a bit of feedback around,
um, particularly in the English and maths curriculums, uh,
where sometimes that we hadn't, uh, got that tightness, that
explicitness that teachers were looking for.
And the Learner First and, and their, uh, experience,
um, uh, supported us with that. Uh, the Learner First
also-
Sorry, Learning First?
Learner First, yeah.
I, I just want to make sure we've got it for the record.
Sorry, Learny First. It's Learning First, sorry.
Learning First also supported us, uh, uh, when we
were looking to review, uh, what we had, what we had got, um,
sitting with the coherence group that we have, uh, to make sure that
within and across learning areas, uh, we had a coherence
of, of curriculum content, uh, that teachers could design, uh,
really rich, uh, programs from.
So supplementary, so which, can you just,
um, uh, outline for us which
curriculum areas has Learning First provided
advice on? Is that just some or all?
Uh, they've probably had, um, because as I said on, uh, the
coherence group, they've had an opportunity to feed in on, on
most-... all learning areas. Um, and some learning
areas, say, in maths for example, uh, they
did, uh, the international benchmarking for us.
Uh, and other learning areas, um, such
as, uh, the PE component of,
um, Health and PE, uh, they supported us with trying to get that
much more explicit, um, description of the learning
right. Uh, so it's, it varied across learning, learning areas.
And as to the need or capability or capacity, we, we needed to get
this right for consultation.
And so, supplementary on that. So, I
mean, we've heard feedback that it feels
like this is a foreign document, and it feels like it has
been either written overseas or taken from other
overseas curriculum areas. So, did Learning First
provide suggested wording
for the new curriculum? Maybe we could use PE as the
example.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
There may be others.
Mm-hmm. Um, yes, and, and w- in response
to, um, questions we had, they would provide, as did other people,
um, internal writers, other-
Other international?
N- no other internationals. Um, and, and, and sector
reps-
But in terms of- ... that's, that's how, that's the process.
... sorry, Pauline. In, in terms of the curriculum, what we're trying to get here
is, yes, a document that works in New Zealand, but doesn't cut
New Zealand children off from wider knowledge.
And we do want, uh, questions about who-
Pauline, can, can we let Pauline answer?
It's not international knowledge, it's the who is providing
that.
So, we have drawn on a range of people from across New Zealand.
We've also drawn on Learning First, because we've wanted to make sure
that in writing this curriculum, we do have some comparability
internationally. I do want our children to have the options
that other children have offshore as well as the best of New Zealand.
So, we've used a range of people. But yes, we-
So, do our New Zealand experts not know what those international
things are that, why did you have to use Learning First?
Not necessarily to the full breadth.
Mm-hmm.
Across all curriculum. Learning First offers-
PE, for example.
... offers a service across, looking across a full
range of jurisdictions. They've provided us advice, they've provided
us insight. Some of it we've agreed with, some of it we haven't.
Okay.
To be cl- can I just be clear on that though?
The PE curriculum we've put out isn't a New Zealand, uh, L-
Learning First curriculum. The, the Ministry
wrote PE curriculum. We are, stand
behind that it's a curriculum for New Zealand students that we are now consulting
on. So, as Alan said, we did get input
from them, but from other people. In the end, what we sign
out is what the Ministry has, uh, written that reflects
Aotearoa New Zealand, and, and we are now it out for consultation on that.
Yeah, my question was around-
Okay, last sup.
Yeah, thank you. Um, just last sup in terms of Learning First, yes, more on
curriculum, um, was about the extent-
... distension.
... of those, that involvement and those suggestions-
Can you do intension?
... that your internal Ministry team then,
uh,
finalizes-
... distension.
No, we don't, we don't finalize all format.
We're given to us by contractors. We took their advice on, on
particular framing of curriculum, and then we made decisions based
on what we know would mean that we had a knowledge-rich curriculum across
each of the learning areas, that had the content we wanted for all New
Zealanders, young New Zealanders, to learn, sequenced in a way
that reflects, uh, the, the journey our young people take through schooling,
uh, from years zero to 10.
Okay. Um, so there's a couple of sups-
Last
sup. ... on this, and then hold on, and then, uh, we've got 15 minutes left in this
part. So, I wanna move through, 'cause there are some other primaries.
So, Lawrence, Shannon, Grant, just all one
quick sup. Go.
Oh, I've got a couple of sups on curriculum-
No,
you can't. ... in general.
Yeah.
Um, because they're quite a big thing in the curriculum.
Yeah, okay. Well, it would just-
I'll, I'll be very quick.
... if there's nothing else in the seat.
If you, just first of all, um, just to note that if we could, if you wouldn't mind
coming back and see which curriculum had involvement from Learning First, then
that'd be helpful.
You've got enough.
Um, just checking in terms of some of the things-
Go
on. ... in terms of subject lists, in terms of subject list, what
consultation has MOE undertaken?
Because, you know, let's say Home Economics and Nutrition, Outwards
Education moving from general to vocational, and also, um,
Art History, those subject associations were all
in, as reported, blindsided by the
removal or change. Is that something that you've consulted with
the subject association?
Uh, the NCA change program has been going for a number of
years. Um, we consulted
on different occasions with subject associations.
Um, j- generally, uh, if we were consulting on not having
a subject, uh, it never goes down well.
Uh, for this subject list, we, um, drew on
our previous consultations we had done.
Uh, we considered whether the learning would be available
through, through different subject areas.
We considered the number of students undertaking or using a
subject, uh, and then we provided advice to the government.
We didn't do specific pre-consultation with subject
associations again on, on those, uh, subject
lists. In terms of,
um, subjects versus
vocational subjects, the world we want to move
to has subjects. The world we want to move to
is away from this notion of achievement standards and university
entrance-
Mm-hmm.
... only being achieved through achievement standards to vocational subjects, and
subjects having the same weighting and the same potential to
move into, uh, university or other pathways.
So, it's a different world we're imagining.
But I guess for some of the things that we hear-
Last
sup. ... from, oh, that's...
Well, I think there are quite a few sups.
(laughs)
Okay, just, just-
Um-
... take your sup and move on.
So, okay, in that case-
... ... go ahead. ... I'm gonna take this one sub and ask a whole bunch of questions.
(laughs)
Um, uh, well, then I'll just go on to Grant.
Well, here, here's the thing. So, but this is quite a big thing-
Mm-hmm.
... in terms of subject-
... in s-... so what we, we, we want to see that level of flexibility, for
sure, but one of the things we're hearing is that students...
can you confirm that students won't be locked into a particular stream, like a
vocational s- stream, for example?
Okay, I'm seeing a-
We can, we can confirm-
... that in the proposed design, students will not be locked into-
So- ... a vocational stream.
Yeah. Okay. Fi- final sub on... how many...
in the period between two-hun- 2024 and 2025, which is the financial
year we're looking at-
Mm-hmm.
... um, how many NDAs have you signed?
Oh, I can get you the number of NDAs.
Um, would you like the NDAs, though, going back over the last 10 years-
Yeah, that'd be great. ... because they've been common practice in the Ministry?
Perfect. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Grant?
Yeah, I'm just going back to your comment about the fact that you want the
curriculum to be recognized and respected globally and
obviously, you know, teaching chil- New Zealand children.
Ha- uh, does... when you think about the cons- the, the fact that we get a lot of
international students come and study in New Zealand, and are quite an important
part of the, um, of our basic education system, and supplying
income for schools and so forth, and, and that cultural breadth, does,
is that, is that, does that help? Is that sort of part of the rationale and the
importance of getting that international view, and making sure we're s- up to
speed, uh, and recognized and respected globally?
Um, my first and foremost consideration is our New Zealand children-
Yep.
... (laughs) and so having a curriculum that's internationally comparable, that is
robust, is important to me for our children.
Uh, but absolutely, um, we do want to, uh, be internationally
recognized. We do want to be, uh, an education system,
uh, that stands up strong and proud internationally, and international
students are a part of our-
Thank you.
... our world and our economy.
Um-
Oh,
yeah. Okay. You...
I have two very quick, um, clarifications.
Cool. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I just want to check, did Learning First have
any, uh, involvement in the Te ma- Te
Marautanga?
No. Mm-mm. No.
Thank you. And earlier when I asked the question about, um, no
verbal or written instruction issued to staff, uh, to
remove, or use less Te Reo in references to
Aotearoa, there was an exchange, and I think the
answer was, from the Ministry, "No." Was there from the
Minister?
I, I can't recall one. That's what I was, I was
looking to check, and then, um, one of my team mentioned, "Not from the
Ministry." Not that I can recall, but if you have a, a
particular concern or an example, I'm, I'm happy to follow up on that with you.
Okay.
Yeah.
Uh, d- my, um, sup on this is,
given the success that you've had in the implementation of structured literacy
in maths, and some of the changes that the Ministry have been making, are you
feeling like there is a shift in the recognition from
the sector, that the Ministry's processes
around these significant changes are robust-
Mm-hmm.
... are well-grounded-
... and that the sector should have confidence in the
work that you're doing rather than, um,
questioning every motive-
(clears throat)
... every reason, the approach, et cetera, um,
on everything that the Ministry does?
If you understand my question.
I do. Um, teaching is a, is a, is a thinking profession.
It's a questioning profession. Um, I think we will always have, uh, the
interplay between the sector and the Ministry around, um, what we're doing and, and
why we're doing it. Um, I... to be honest, I'd expect nothi- nothing
less. (laughs) Um, uh, I'm confident, uh,
that the direction we are taking is grounded in good evidence.
Um, I'm confident in us, that if it proves we are
wrong, and I think we have a track record, that if we prove we are
wrong, we will change direction. But right now I'm,
I'm confident that, um, we're on the right course.
All right. Shannon.
Thank you. Wh- why has the decision been made to not include
references to, um, trans and non-binary students
in the health curric-
Mm-hmm.
Who made that decision, and what was your advice on that?
Sure. Uh, we undertook, um, quite
extensive consultation, uh, off the back of the ERO report, I
believe, Pauline, uh, around the content to be included in the
curriculum, uh, for, uh, health and peer and relationships and
sexuality education. Uh, my recollection, and Pauline, you
will correct me if I'm wrong, was that one of the areas
that was,
uh, was quite divisive was around the
inclusion of, um, of those gender terminologies, and
it was an area parents weren't necessarily comfortable with.
But Pauline, you're far more-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. ... over the, uh, consultation itself-
Mm-hmm.
... and the decision-making process than me.
Um, the, the consultation was quite polarized.
There wasn't a middle ground. Uh, there were a range of people...
uh, uh, uh, you know, there was a range of, um, a range of
views on, on this, on either side. Um, uh, there
were, there were a number of parents-
Mm-hmm.
... who felt that that was a discussion that should happen in the family, not at,
at school. Um, we have a... we have developed the
curriculum so that it's inclusive of diverse, diversity and diverse
identities but not led by it. So you'll see in the health
and, health, um, curriculum, around
Y- Year 8, I think, there's a, there's a knowledge,
uh, a knowledge in the knowledge strand there, there is, um, content
around how adolescent changes impact on how students
feel about their identity based on those, on those adolescent
changes. There is, um, f- further on in Year
10, uh-
... the expectation that teachers are providing, uh, fostering an
environment where, uh, those diverse identities are
acknowledged and valued. Um, and we expect that
schools will continue to provide that safe, a safe, um, and
inclusive environment for our young people.
We also try to include where we can across the rest of the curriculum,
and I was just looking, um, say in, in, in our
histories curriculum, New Zealand histories curriculum, you know, uh, Georgina
Beyer is a person of note, you know, an historical, historical person of
note that we want young people to understand, this transgender MP for
example. So, you know, we are making, uh,
the curriculum inclusive, but we have made decisions,
decisions have been made in the draft about, uh, leaving some things to
parents to discuss or take, uh, take the lead on, um, with their young
people.
So what are the risks that you've identified for those
ʻākonga? Um,
and how are you managing those given the
absence of the relations- relationship and sexuality guidelines
and the absence within the health curriculum?
Uh, so
we still expect schools to provide safe and
inclusive environments for all children
regardless of race, regardless of gender identity.
That doesn't change, and that is something, and I remember, uh, Nick Pole, I think
was here with me last year, and we talked about this and the processes ERO runs to
make sure that schools are providing those environments.
If schools are not providing safe environments for children and young people,
children and young people are being excluded or
(laughs) are impacted, we would be having a conversation with that s- that school.
Yeah, so there's no-
So regardless of the curriculum, we still expect
schools to provide safe spaces for students.
Can I
But you've removed the support mechanisms to help them
address those safety risks.
We haven't removed those mechanisms.
The guidelines.
Uh, the guidelines were removed by the government last year.
We had, we had, we covered this last year as clear the government removed those
guidelines. We've now done the curriculum.
The curriculum still has space within it for discussing
issues of gender identity, uh, but it is not as
explicit as the relationship guidelines were given the
polarized nature of views and views from parents.
Right Lawrence, your side.
Just, just on this because you just before mentioned that,
you know, we're very confident in terms of the evidence base and etc., and I'm
glad you're taking on feedback from parents, but what does the evidence then tell
you in terms of some of the work that you've done and just also raising, you know,
the expectation for schools is there, but once MOE steps in,
that's a reactive approach. Sometimes the harm to the child is
already done for you to step in, but something like this was supposed to
be a proactive approach. Can you just speak a little bit more to the, uh, th- to
the evidence?
So, so we are still there in terms of guidance
around providing safe and inclusive environments.
That, that hasn't changed regardless of the curriculum.
So, that is all still in place and we still work with schools on
that.
But in terms of the things that you removed that you, that the parents thought was
polarizing, what does the evidence and the experts in-
There- ... like the rainbow communities say?
There are, um, unhelpfully
mixed views, mixed evidence, and,
um, experts on different sides. So what we have looked
to achieve is a ground which keeps children safe,
included, has space for those conversations to happen, but
removes schools from the middle of what was becoming a very difficult
situation for them to manage.
Okay Grant, um, primary.
Uh, meke E Reo. It's all right.
All right.
Okay. I'll go to my primary, which is regarding student
attendance. Um, and student attendance over
the last, uh, five years has
gone down dramatically, and then over the last, um,
couple of years improved, um, significant,
and interested to understand, um, the Ministry's
perspective on what has driven, um, that increase.
Mm. Uh, so we did see post-COVID a big drop off
in, uh, attendance. Uh, since then, a
range of efforts have gone in. Uh, we have had
quite open, um, public discussions I think around the importance of
attendance and what missing time at school costs
a child, what it means for them. I think that's been a very open national
conversation, ERO have done reports.
Uh, and I think we see, uh, that acknowledgement
from, from the community that attendance is important.
Uh, since the start of term one this
year, schools have been required to report
daily attendance. It's coded between justified and
unjustified. What that has given schools is live dashboards so they
can really see what is happening for their children.
Uh, schools have surged into action I have to say, and have done a
stellar job at engaging with the communities, engaging with whanau, getting
children back to school. Um, and then from
the start of next year, every school will need to have in place
an attendance, uh, management plan.
We had already provided through to schools, um, a
framework for thinking about managing attendance.
So, under five days away a term, you're probably
okay (laughs) . As you're creeping up and by the time you get to 15
days away a term, you've got a real problem and the warning bells are going off.
We've given schools a range of options they consider, can consider
using, uh, to re-engage children in school.
Uh, and of course we've had a big investment, uh, through the most
recent budget, uh, for new attendance services, which we've
contracted and will be coming online, uh, next year and will
provide a far more comprehensive service.
So I think there has been a change in the national conversation around the
importance of attendance. I think schools have put a big focus on it
and have used all sorts of different, uh, methods that are gonna work for them in
their communities. We have supported them, uh, and they have the information
now they need to actually see what's going on.
And have the targets been a key, uh, driver of
that-... conversation and increase in
performance when it comes to attendance, do you think?
I, I, I think the targets have crystallized attention.
Um, we were worried about attendance pre-target, uh, but
certainly, uh, the targets are,
are very present and central.
Ranjoo?
Yeah, very quickly. So, before we heard that, uh, the trend
of appearance taking children away for a longer time is kind of
reducing, but then still there are parents those who take children and keep
them away from school for a couple of days, like, for family events or sometimes
even going overseas if the, um, flights are cheaper.
So, what is the ministry doing to kind of send its signal to
schools and parents that, that actually affects the school,
uh, um, their children's, uh, ability to learn?
I, I, I think schools and MOE have consistently been
sending that signal. Um, I do know we've had, uh, various
campaigns running to get those messages out there.
We will continue to get those messages out there.
Um, ultimately, um,
parents need to see and understand the value of sending their children
to school. I think, um,
the more parents can see, uh, the positive
changes and results for children in the classroom, the more important it will
become to them to take their children there.
Okay, um, I'm gonna-
What?
Um-
Just one quick-
Can you give us an example of the campaign that, uh, the Ministry
runs?
Do you want to talk about the campaign?
(laughs)
(laughs) Um, so at the moment, for example, we're working with a number
of, um, influencers, uh, to,
um, ????? social media. We've been talking
to, um, the, uh, Association of General Practitioners as
well around-
Mm-hmm.
... getting information out through GP visits around the importance of attendance.
So, we're trying a whole lot of different, um, avenues to have
consistent messaging.
Okay.
With that.
Um, quick sups from Shannon, Lawrence, and then Mike, and then we're
gonna round this section off. So-
Tha- thank you. I come from a community where our attendance, um,
service has been... Uh, our local attendance service has been
cut. Um, and I just wanted to ask the
question of, what's the role of schools, um, in
that decision-making where there might be a change of contract?
Uh-
Is there consultation? Is there... What's your expectation?
Well, in terms of the attendance service, we've
got, um, some in-school attendance provisions.
I think it's around 171 schools who've got, um, the
ability to do their own attendance services in-house.
Um, in terms of the contracting we did for the attendance
services now, we wanted outcomes-based
contracts. We went through a thorough procurement
process, and we picked the best candidates we could find.
Yeah. So on that procurement process, are schools consulted as
in that?
I would need to double-check.
Right.
I don't think they were.
Okay, we'll put that as a follow-up question.
We can double-check that.
Thank you.
Lawrence.
Yeah, um, just related to school attendance as well is w-
we're hearing from some of the particularly rural communities that the cuts to bus
routes has affected families' ability to actually
send their students, um, through.
And then can I just check? Uh, in general, I've heard there's a tightening of some
of the school bus routes. Would you be able to speak to, um, some of
the, the criteria change? You know?
I have James Mefford here with me today.
Um-
We have come
to see him in person. ... General Manager
across, uh, transport-
Indeed.
... who can answer your questions.
Oh, that's fascinating. Thank you. Yes.
So-
Mm-hmm.
... um, I'll get you to clarify the question a wee bit because-
Ashhurst.
Ashhurst. Oh, sorry, Ashhurst. So the eligibility criteria haven't changed, haven't changed
for a very long time. Mm-hmm. Um, they date back from the
1920s when school
transport assistance was first initiated in quite different, um,
social and economic conditions than we have now.
But for better or for worse, they're still there.
Um, but broadly, the eligibility criteria are that we
ex- we will assist students who meet all three criteria
that they're attending the nearest school, or, um, state or
state-integrated school that they are more than a certain distance from the
school,
uh, and that, um, there's no suitable public transport
available. So, in the case of Ashhurst, um, the availability
of suitable public transport meant that, um,
those students weren't eligible. Can I just check on that? Yeah.
So, there are 290 students who are affected by
any changes to school transport. There is one public bus going
from Ashhurst to Palmerston North that takes place every half an hour with
25 seats. How would you then expect to get
290 students to school on time with one bus?
Indeed. Um, so, a public transport
network will be designed based on current demand.
No one puts on anticipatory demand on a, on a PT
network. Um, what happens is that we don't
take... therefore, it doesn't make sense for us to, uh, take account of the
current capacity. But what we do is engage, and engage
early, with regional councils and other public transport
authorities. When we identify a,
a public transport route that meets our definition of suitable public
transport. We then talk to them about what we know about
the, um, disposition of students, uh, across the network, uh,
and in those areas, and we enter into discussions to,
um,
give them an opportunity to go through their own processes to, um,
sometimes to approach NZTA for funding, sometimes to
talk to their own suppliers about meeting that demand.
So, um, in the case of Palmerston North broadly, we engaged with
the council, and in a number of places, um, they decided
to increase, um, capacity on their network to meet the
anticipated demand. But in the case of Ashhurst, they decided
not to.
Okay. Um, final question, Mark.
Uh, thank you chair. It was just a supplementary on, uh, Pamjeet's questionnaire
about the, the kids going to school. Do you, um...
I guess, you re- you re- referred earlier about the kids actually learning to like
maths and, and there's been quite a growth in that.
Do you think as the kids get more confident and happy, you know, in their
learning that they will actually want to go to school themselves?
Do you expect to see a correlation as their-
Ab-
... achievements improve?
Absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's hard to want to go to school if you get to
the age of 10 and can't read.
Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Yep, thank you.
Fantastic. Uh, that's a good place, I think, to leave that section.
Um,
we're, we're gonna take a 15-minute break now, um,
so we'll be-
(laughs) Okay.
... sitting back down at 25, um, past.
You've done very well.
Very
well.
(laughing)
Righty-ho. Um, thanks
very much everyone. We are moving, uh, now into part
three, um, in a little bit of a shorter timeframe than we
had. I think we ran over a bit in part two, um,
and I'm gonna kick off with Shannon Olwin.
Kia ora, thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, we have just hit
90,000, uh, young people not engaged in education,
training or employment. That's the size of Palmerston North.
What role is the Ministry of Education playing in
addressing that number?
Uh, Andy, I know you've got the figures there, um, we
are looking at further investment in Youth Guarantee, in
terms of working with our social sector agencies around, um,
pathways into training and employment.
You've brought your figures up now, Andy.
Yes.
Would you like to elaborate?
Absolutely. So, um, I think a, a couple of things
about the overall number of NEETs, it's, um, uh, the
interesting thing I think about it is that it's a point in time measure, so it's
measured on a particular day. So of those
90,000-odd, um, many will only
be, um, NEET for a relatively short amount of time.
So, a, a very good example of that is that the rate is always significantly higher
in the first quarter of the calendar year, because what you have is a lot of young
people who've finished school or training and are kind of working out what to do
next. So, we tend to focus on, um,
uh, a, a much smaller number of around 12,000, um, young
people who we are much more concerned about, who are at risk of being
NEET for an extended period of time.
That statistic is calculated by, um, Statistics New
Zealand based on those who've been NEET for a period of around six months or
longer, and that's the area where we really want to focus our
efforts. Um,
so in light of the labor market and, and the sort of
downturn that we're in at the moment, as Alan says, the government has increased
the number of Youth Guarantee places that it's investing
in. Um, it's some way short of what it was 10 years or so ago when
the, um, the demand for, um, those places was much
higher. Um, there's been a significant shift in the Ministry of Social
Development's employment services since then, um, and
with the re-establishment of the polytechnics, um,
some of the strategic priority funding that Minister Simmons
has, um, announced, um, is, um, directed
at provision that is, um, uh, aimed at supporting people
who are at risk of becoming NEET. Having said all of that,
um, over a very long period of time that NEET number has remained
quite, quite stubborn at around that 10 to 12% mark, um, and
we recognize that it's a very significant effort that's needed to support those
young people.
Mm-hmm. That number is only going up though,
10,500 more than the prior
year.Um, what, uh, have you seen in
relation to, uh, the drop in apprenticeship
numbers, as an example, and foundation learning has
impacted on that overall NEETs numbers?
So, um, the
2024 quarter one number peaked at
around 94.4 thousand, um, across the
15 to 24 year age group. Um, that then went up to
around 97.6 thousand in quarter one 2025, but of course,
subsequently in the most recent quarter come down to just under 87
thousand. So, it does fluctuate quite significantly through the year.
I think, um, the change in apprenticeship numbers is very
much driven by the labor market and its cycles.
Um, you know, in a flatter economy, it's, um, much less
likely that, um, employers are likely to be signing up large
numbers of new apprenticeships. That's, that's a, a cyclical effect that we would
have expected to see. Um, and I
think the, um, types of students that tend to enroll in
an apprenticeship are usually those who, who have quite a high level of
labor market attachment already, so they're not usually new entrants
into the workforce. They're usually people who'd been with an employer for some
time and then get signed up to an apprenticeship.
Mm-hmm.
So, I think we're probably talking about a slightly different cohort of young
people.
Uh, uh, I got the, um, the explainer yesterday about the e-
economic downturn and how-
Yeah. ...employers don't take those numbers up.
But if you reflect on, um, the 2017 to
2023 period, which also had an economic
downturn, we saw apprentice numbers
spike.
Yes.
So, how do you justify that one?
So, I think, um, COVID had a really unusual
effect on the labor market.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and obviously what you saw is a really significant loss of confidence,
particularly in those construction industries, um, which were very cyclical in
early 2020. And then with a combination of the border
being shut and the lack of access to migrant labor and,
um, then a, a significant house price boom and the, the
effect that that then had on construction, um,
the,
m- most of that upsurge in apprenticeship numbers that took place around that time
was in the construction industry.
Now obviously, per your question yesterday, it's also to do with the introduction
of the Apprenticeship Boost scheme, and that undoubtedly was part of that effect as
well.
Thank you. Um, can I move to ISBs now as a new line of
questioning? Thank you. Um,
what role has the Ministry played, um, in the
establi- or the design and establishment of the
ISBs? Uh, what, what are the deliverables
and expectations of the ISBs from your perspective?
Yeah, so we, um, uh, are the policy agency that's been involved
in, um, supporting Minister Simmons through the redesign of vocational
education as a whole. So we, our advice, our role is primarily
the policy advice, um, that in this case then led into
both the legislative design and the funding decisions
that, um, are associated with the setup of ISBs
and, um, we've most recently supported the minister in taking
through the Orders in Council that, um, that established the
ISBs and, and, and set up their role and their scope.
Um, and we work very closely with the Tertiary Education Commission which has been
setting up the governance and the, um, establishment boards that have led to
the creation of the ISBs, uh, as institutions, so.
Thank you. And so in relation to Minister Stanford's announcement
of including ISB in the future vocational, uh,
curriculum re- refresh, uh, what are the deliverables for
the ISBs within that component?
So, obviously the, um, uh, consultation
on the proposed changes to NZQA...
Uh, sorry, NCEA (laughs) -
For the avoidance of doubt, NCEA, uh, which, um-
I'm with you (laughs)
...which has recently finished, uh, is still being considered by the minister in
terms of any final, um, policy announcements.
If that goes ahead broadly as per the consultation,
um, then the Ministry will be working directly with
ISBs to both, um, decide what the list of
vocational subjects is, to work with ISBs so that they can
set standards which mean that those vocational subjects are then...
Provide a pathway into work and into vocational education
post-school, um, and to work with them and, and as
required with tertiary providers to create the, the program content
which is analogous to curriculum content that, that students would then
study in their year 12 and year 13.
And what's the timeline of Minister Stanford's
expectations?
Well, she hasn't announced any final decisions yet, so we'll be able to provide a
bit more clarification on that, um, closer
to the time- In terms of the
consultation...
Yeah.
...um, if decisions were made on the timeline and the consultation the first
year that a new qualification system with the vocational
subjects would go live is 2029?
That's correct. Yeah.
2029.
Yeah.
Yeah. My concern there was that, um, next year you're working with a
skeleton
crew (laughs) .
Yeah.
Um, and so is your expectation therefore that there will be additional funding
that will come in to, uh, the ISBs? They're, they're operating on
half what it was, with more responsibilities within the
secondary school
So our expectation is, uh, if, if the work was to
go ahead on vocational subjects with ISBs, then the Ministry would have
a contract relationship with them, uh, and we would make sure that they were funded
to do so.
Okay.
So, that's it.
Um, I've got, um, Lawrence first. Um, for a sup-
Thank you. Just in terms of that, you know, I think Shannon's raised some
really good questions around ISBs, but I want to check in terms of the initial
consultation process for both the, the change to the NCEA and
also the subject list. Was Universities, Universities New
Zealand, universities individually, or TEC consulted as a part of that
process?
Um, they weren't consulted as part of the process of creating
the Phase 5 subjects, to my knowledge, Pauline,
But they're, but they're part of consultation now.
So, we're in a process of consultation around the future of NCEA
which they are a part of.
Yeah.
So, how then would you be confident when you put out
those subject lists and the proposed changes to NCEA without understanding what the
new environment is?
We worked very closely with NZQA, both on
the, uh, subjects and on the NCEA,
uh, proposed future. NZQA have that close
relationship with, um, Universities New Zealand around university
entrance.
Okay.
Okay. Uh, Willow-Jean.
Uh, thank you. Um, so I mean, just in terms
of, uh, the, there's the timeline for
NCEA-
Mm-hmm.
... um, which kind of overlaps with the curriculum
refresh that is also going on. So, when you have, um,
the refresh of the curriculum for years 11 to
13, uh, draft out
Term 1 next year-
Mm.
... are
some subjects, all subjects? And
what does that mean in terms of these that are going to be vocational?
Mm. Do you want to talk about the subject creations?
Um, yep, so (clears throat) being released in Term 1 next year will be the
Phase 5 subjects that are coming from the schooling curriculum.
Um, we are still waiting on decisions, of course, around the
vocational, uh, element of, of the f- you know,
of what's gonna happen in terms of vocation and, and vocational
subjects in the, and the qualification.
Um, and we'll, we'll determine those timelines, as Andy pointed out, when we engage
with the ISBs.
Thank you.
Okay. Uh, Grant.
Yeah, um, just uh, thank you. Picking up on, sort of flowing on a wee bit from what
Lawrence was talking about and the evolved universities.
Um, in terms of preparing the NCEA, you know, the, the, the
changes, um, make sure they prepare students that
wanna get, take the academic pathway into uni- into universities and so forth,
to make sure they've been prepared to transition in, to a situation
whereby there are a lot, a number of subjects the exams
really, really matter. Yet the, the current system that
students can bypass that to a degree and, and not have the same pressure and deal
with that. I just worry 'cause the, you get feedback from the universities or from
students that that's quite a shock for them, that, that change.
Are you, is that something that you're working with the universities on to
understand to make sure that academic students are well-prepared?
Um, from the start of looking at NCEA,
um, which I think started about seven or eight
years ago-
Mm-hmm.
... we've been in discussions with universities around how our
qualification system can
better prepare, yes, students for university, but actually for other pathways as
well as-
Yeah, that's what I mean, I, I just couldn't-
And certainly universities have consistently raised with us concerns
around, um, around aspects of how the NCEA
qualification operates.
So, just on that. So, if they've been raising these concerns, so what's been
done in the past to actually address them?
Uh, well we had the NCEA change program-
Mm-hmm.
... um, which was underway. Um,
AERO reviewed, um, the implementation of Level
1 as part of that review. Um, they were able to draw
some wider conclusions about aspects of the
qualification that should be reconsidered and further
strengthened. And off the back of that, uh, the government
has, has agreed to this proposal for
consultation. So we, we've been in a process for a while of
considering how do we have a qualification that
is fair-
Yeah, across the board.
... works for New Zealand, but is also dealing with a range of different concerns.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay. Uh, Lawrence.
Yeah, um, just I was, again, just on what Grant is saying and yeah, this ties
into sort of meaningful measures when it comes to tertiary education and tertiary
student outcomes. Um,
having lectured at University of Auckland, one of the biggest
challenge we've seen with students coming through is actually students'
ability to work independently without having
their hand being held. And to be honest we tell students, "Look, I'm in a class of
250 to a thousand. I'm not gonna tell you what to do.
You either do what you do, or you do something else."
(laughs)
Literally that's what I tell students.
Um, how then is what you're working on, and this
sort of change being incorporated the ability for students who
work independently and not being, for example, spin
fed?
Um,
interestingly I was a teacher at university, I won't say how many
decades ago.
(laughs) (laughs)
Um-
A few years ago. (laughs)
... um, but it was the same complaint then-
Yeah. ... in terms of, it is a transition from school to university-
That's
right. It always has been. ... it's a very different environment.
You're going from, you know, a class of 30-
Super short.
... to giant lecture theaters.
Right.
Um, I think our education system, um, has
worked for a long time and will continue to work to help students develop
those skills to work independently.
Um, but we will always have those transition points in
life, um, from being in a school environment, to a big tertiary
environment, or to an employment environment.
And some, I mean, my honest response is sometimes you have to live life and go
through that to learn those things.
That's right.
Absolutely.
That's right. Um-
(laughs)
... ******* primary.
(laughs) Yeah, thank you. So-
That's the same thing that
Yeah, we've got.
So when we examined about, uh, tertiary education earlier
this year, and that obviously when we talk about education we are always concerned
about course completion and retention.
Mm-hmm.
But in that conversation we also talked about, um, focusing on the
employment outcomes. And then in that report, the committee made
a suggestion. So I want to understand what progress has the ministry
made on the suggestions made by this committee earlier this year?
... uh, to kind of put some kind of measures, qualitative measures
or the other ways, um, you know, um, could be measured what the
outcome has been, certainly in terms of employment of, uh,
graduates.
Um, so we have for quite some time now
been publishing a, uh, um, information
set about the earnings and income outcomes of graduates
by institution and by subject from the tertiary education
system. So, um, through match data
involving, um, tax data and the national student
number, we're able to, um, articulate
how, uh, a particular provider's, um, graduates in
a particular subject fare in the labor market, and to derive from
that a kind of broad performance indicator around the quality of the program
based on those employment outcomes.
So-
So we've got that, I think, on
educationcounts.govt.nz.
Yeah.
Um, I can provide a further link to that.
So it doesn't need anything else to be done? It's already happening.
It's always important that we keep our performance measures and our statistics up
to date.
And that we m- make sure that they're the most valid measure of time, but yes, we
do have a time series on employment outcomes.
Okay.
Yeah.
Good, thank you.
Um, when we're talking about tertiary
education and, uh, completion rates-
Mm-hmm.
... in terms of the last four years, my understanding is
completion rates hit the l- their lowest point in
2023,
uh, but 2024
increased. What's the projection for
2025 in terms of completion rates for
tertiary?
Um, so you're correct that we've seen, um,
increases in both first year retention rates and course
completion rates over the last couple of years, and that, um,
uh, those have improved over the last sort of four, four
to five years or so. Um, qualification completion rates, which
is quite an important qualitative measure, have been a little bit more steady.
We don't have a forecast of those rates,
um, a- a- you know, in, in terms of any sense of, of
what they might look like at the moment.
Um, generally, with a tightening labor market, you do see those
retention and completion rates improving, um, because e-
graduates are much less likely to leave and go into work because, you know,
either work is less available or, or less appealing.
Um, I mean, the other thing I think is that we've had, for
quite a long time, uh, some quite concerted action by the Tertiary Education
Commission to make sure that providers, um, understand that,
um, those education performance indicators are one of the key metrics that they're
held to account for. Um, we are, you know, seeing,
broadly speaking, a continual improvement in those, in those performance
measures over time.
Fantastic. And a supplementary to that, when
you appeared in front of the committee, uh, earlier in the
year when we spoke about vote, um, tertiary education, one
of the suggestions that this committee made was on developing
more meaningful and qualitative measures.
Good answers.
Yeah. But in terms of that, um, point specifically
for, um, science and technology-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and mathematics, has there been any work on
those three particular-
Mm-hmm.
Banding, yeah.
So, so the data that we have-
Yeah. ... is broken down by, um, subject classification, and
so it's possible to separate out the, um, the
performance indicators by, by those subjects. By
the subjects. Yeah.
Okay. Um,
Shannon. Oh, sorry, did you have a sup, Lawrence?
Um, no, I had a primary.
Okay. Yeah, Shannon's got a primary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, are you confident that there's enough
foundation learning provision available for
young people wanting to ac- uh, access level one and two
learning across the country?
Um, we're keeping a very close eye on that as conditions in the labor market
change. Um, as I said, we have, we looked at that over the last
budget and have increased the number of places available.
Um, we also keep a close eye on the level of referrals that we're getting from the
youth service in MSD. Um, MSD has
shifted the, uh, composition of its employment service programs quite
significantly, which I think has probably reduced demand for level one and
two provision over the longer term.
Uh, and I think that's probably quite a positive outcome actually, in terms of
employment outcomes. Um, so we are keeping quite a close
eye.
So you're saying there's less demand.
Um, uh, than o- over a sort of five to ten year period,
yes. But not to the extent that we, we-
But 90,000 NEETs.
Um, so again, a lot of the
NEET population is, is n- is not NEET for, for an extended
period of time. Right? So, you would be captured in those statistics if you
were, you know, taking a, a six-month
break before starting a degree, for example.
So, I think the relationship between that headline NEET rate
and the, the foundation learning volume is, you know, a bit
loose.
Yeah.
Or ineffectively.
And so as we depart from Te Pūkenga and move
into the new, um,
set-up, uh, we're seeing large number
of cuts to courses, some campus
closures, uh, a number of polytechnics still
undecided to depart off the federation.
Um, what concerns do you have about changes in
provisions, in which areas where we, in
fact, may be making it harder for learners in particular
areas to access the same opportunities
as others in different areas?
So, again, that's something we're gonna monitor very closely.
I think, um, as Minister Simmons commented yesterday,
we-... for the most part, when a provider closes down a
program, it's just because there isn't enough demand to, to meet that kind of
economically viable level. Um, one of the responses
to that in the set up of the new polytechs has been the strategic provision
fund, and I think around 50% of that is directed towards
foundation level courses. Um, think probably
three or four, two or three budgets ago, we also
put up the funding rate for foundation level courses to try and make
sure that they are sort of viable. But look, I mean, uh, to your
point about risk, that we need to keep a really close eye on this as the new
polytechs start trading in the early part of next year and, and
be ready to respond if we do see that pattern of-
Hmm.
... of Youth Guarantee provision shifting.
Where Minister Simmons and I fundamentally disagree is
on student staff ratios as a, as a baseline
for, um, your, your business model
basically. And under Te Pūkenga, that enabled
regional communities to operate with a lower number of students
versus what you might see in urban centers where there's a higher number
and the balance remains the same. So what happens to those
regional communities where
effectively they can't make the numbers anymore?
We've set them up to fail.
Um, I-
Have we set them
up to fail? ... I wouldn't want to be drawn into a disagreement between yourself and Minister
Simmons on this topic (laughs)
But from an equity perspective-
Yeah.
... ensuring equitable outcomes and access to learning no matter where you live
in Aotearoa.
Um, I think that is always going to be a challenge for s- for communities with
small populations-
Hmm.
... um, particularly where you're dealing with, uh, what is quite a high cost
business model in the form of polytech training.
Um, Te Pūkenga had, of course, made some closures itself.
I see.
And, I mean, my, uh, uh, view is that
had Te Pūkenga continued in existence, it would've been forced
to face probably some quite uncomfortable decisions about some
programs itself. I think part of the solution to this lies
in the ability to use, you know, o- o- online learning and local
tutors as a delivery mechanism, so a much more blended approach.
And that's the idea behind the federation, um, you know,
opportunity that, that the smaller polytechs have available to them.
Um, we've yet to see, of course, how those polytechs will want to work with the
Open Polytechnic and you may see, for example, some wanting to move into
that federation model in order to be able to access more, more economically
viable modes of learning.
And are, and are you seeing any evidence that suggests that these changes are
disproportionately impacting Maori learners in
particular?
Um, I haven't seen any evidence to that effect, no.
Ha- have you asked, looked?
Well, the changes, of course, have not been implemented yet, so I think that's
something we would need to look at over the next sort of couple of years in terms
of understanding the, the impact that that has.
Okay. Well done.
Okay. Well, we'll move to the next part then, um,
stewardship and organizational wellbeing.
Um, Willow-Jean.
Sure. Thank you. Uh, oh, my first questions are,
um... Sorry, just checking it is squarely in line
with...
(laughs)
Oh yes, um, 4.2. Um,
sorry, I can also do 4.1. Um, I just want
to understand, in your view, how would you rate
your organizational culture
and wellbeing?
I think we have had some challenges in recent years.
Um,
the, uh, restructure process that operated a couple
of years ago is on public record as not having gone
particularly well. Um, that's been a real
focus for me in terms of resetting, um, the relationship with
staff, um, rebuilding, uh,
some of the trust that I think we lost from staff in terms of how that, that
restructure, uh, operated. My
overall impression, uh, is that staff morale
is improving. Uh, we have a clear direction of
travel, uh, we're clear on our purpose, we're
focused on getting back to what is our core business, how do we
do that well, uh, how do we make sure that workloads are
sustainable by actually focusing on our core business and doing it well.
Uh, so I think while there have been challenges in
recent years, I, I think things are on the improve.
In terms of that, um, I mean, are you dealing with any
complaints internally?
Uh, we have a speak up process. Um, so we do
have, um... We, we always have, looking back over a
number of years, had s- active speak up, uh, complaints that
we're working through. Uh, we've put in quite a bit of work recently to
improve our speak up process. A few years
back, um,
one of the, uh, speak up
investigations, uh, it didn't go,
uh, as well as it should have, and so we made changes to that
process so that staff could feel confident about making
those complaints. And I think we're now seeing staff actually
using that mechanism more, which I, I think is a really good thing.
And in terms of the relationship between the ministry and the
sector, how would you rate that?
I think, uh, I think the sector understand the role of
the ministry. Um, they understand that we're the
public service, uh, we provide advice to governments, governments
make decisions, uh, we are there to implement decisions.
Um, but that does mean-There are always tension
points. I'm, I'm yet to have a year in the Ministry of
Education where there haven't been tensions between the Ministry
and the sector. And part of that is because when you're needing to make change
or
ask for things to, to operate differently, that can be, that can be
difficult. But I think we have an open dialogue.
I have regular meetings with all the peak bodies.
Um, I think they know that I listen to what, what they have to
say, um, that I'm open with them, uh, as I can
be.
So, I, I think the relationship is, is on a fairly
stable footing.
Okay. Lawrence?
Thank you, Chair. Um, just in significant of the Chair, I have a, a series of
question, and they're on school lunches, and it's under
4.3, so particularly around the financial-
Mm-hmm. ... and non-financial. Um, I think I wanna start with, by just checking
in terms of your, um,
appendix, I think in terms of Budget 2024, there was $160
million allocated to s- Kaiariko Ka Ako school
lunch program, but I've noticed in Appendix 3, um, of your
pre-hearing question that s-
Oh.
... that Compass was awarded $143
million, and then an additional $18 million.
Oh.
Would you be able to just say why there has been quite a substantial increase
from what was budgeted for Kaiariko Ka Ako? And that's just one.
Um...
I don't have that appendix with me.
I don't know if you do, Helen, so we can
come, unless you have that there, we can come back to you on that.
It might be to do with an inflation adjustment.
Okay. We'll put that down as a follow-up.
Yeah, we'll, we'll come back to you on that.
Yeah. Cool. Um, the other question then to, to follow up from that, you know,
we also note that on top of, um,
the, what
the school lunch collective service agreement, there is an
additional waste pickup from schools on Fridays which has been funded separately at
$1.6 million per year. Would you be able to speak to why there's
an increase, why there's an additional funding for waste pickup?
More waste pickup.
Um, we're really focused on waste reduction, so we've been working
closely with Compass on, on
all avenues for reducing waste. I don't know if there's-
So that, but that's an additional to the contract?
We can come back on all components of
the contract, yeah. We'll put that as a follow-up. Yeah.
Um, further questions around school lunches.
So in terms of the, um, the m- the announcement
with the RFP for, I guess for primary schools-
Mm-hmm.
... we see that Compass has now been dropped, and yet now there are 10 regional
ones that has been part of that procurement process.
So Compass hasn't been dropped. So Compass-
From the prim-
So Compass was never operating in primary, so Compass still-
Yeah. Oh no, so Compass was in... Yeah.
Sorry just... Sorry, just
let Alan finish.
Yeah. Sorry, (overlapping)
So Compass will still be operating, um, the external
provision for year seven and up settings.
The, uh, RFP that was out, um, and has just been
awarded was for the contributing primary schools-
Yeah.
... um, and it was awarded to 10 providers, but Compass is still providing-
Not-
... many, many meals and-
Yeah. That's all good. I want to focus on the fact that in that particular
part you're looking at, um, now the change has been shifted
away from a $3 requirement upwards to a $5
requirement. Um, but what we're still seeing
is that internal providers and Hapu and iwi providers are still
locked into a two-year $4 contract.
Is that correct? Or will have there been adjustments for that
as well? We're doing inflation, we're
doing inflation adjustments. Yes, we are doing inflation adjustments, and the range is, is $3 to
$5. So it depends, for example, travel costs are a big factor of that, so it
very much-
Yeah.
... depends on the part of the country.
What about for internal providers?
So internal providers-
Have there been a, yeah, adjustment?
... it's for... Yes.
It's, it's-
They have, they are having an inflation adjustment of 6 to 7%.
One of the things we discussed previously, um, um,
was around the fact that the wholesalers for school
lunches and for internal Hapu and iwi providers, um, they are
not locked into a contract, so they can put up their prices
by term or even by month. Have you noticed any
increase in terms of the cost 'cause of the
produce for your internal providers?
Well, one of the reasons we're doing the inflation adjustments is
because of inflation-
Yeah.
... on costs for
across all of the models.
So all of the models will be having inflation adjustments.
And just a final thing that, that was something we spoke about, if you wouldn't
mind coming back to us to provide any evidence that you have
of waste both in terms of the surplus, those that have
been returned, but also waste-
Mm-hmm.
... that are being, for example, eaten and then thrown away.
Yeah. So things aren't thrown away, to be clear.
We've got a, a big, uh, recycling program
getting geared right up which has worm farms.
We've got the Hamilton recycling plant going, so...
Would you know how much of that is currently in terms of,
that's some of the recycling, do you have an amount that you're able to-
Yeah, we can, we can provide that.
We'll put that as follow-up.
Cool.
Yes, so mine actually is very close to that question, so what I wanted to know was
our waste percentage comparison between the old system and the new
system. If you have the percentage, that would be really helpful.
Absolutely. Um, just to note, um, the old system didn't have
particularly great data collection (laughs) , so, um,
we have far better data and we're monitoring this system to
a far greater extent-
Yeah.
... than we were the old, but we will provide as much as we can of a comparator.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Thank
Um, Willow-Jane's got herself.
Yeah, thank you. Uh, so just in terms of this program, I mean, how would you
rate it?
Well, there are many thousands of children being fed every
day, and I think that's a good thing.
In terms of the number of complaints that have, uh, come across the
year, um?
Um, complaints have been tracking well down over the
year. Um, I think we're at
0.001%
of all meals have complaints around them.
Mm-hmm. Oh, but how many complaints is there?
Oh, I've got the numbers here. Yeah.
So this term I think we were at, um, 30 complaints
and we deliver... and that's in the context of 200,000 lunches a day-
(clears throat)
... being delivered on average.
And what are the nature of those, um, complaints?
Uh, sometimes, some of them have been around labeling, particularly for,
um, vegetarian-
Mm-hmm.
... meals. Um, some of them have been around, um, there was
cardboard, a couple of pieces of cardboard in three
meals last week. So, there's a, a range of,
uh, range of different complaints.
But overall satisfaction has been tracking up, incidents and
complaints have been tracking down, and as an overall percentage of
the meals that are being provided and delivered, it's, it's very
small.
It... But I mean-
I'm sorry.
... the minister s- thank you. The minister said that everything would be sorted by
term two. Do you think, in your opinion it is?
I think to the best of anyone's abilities running a scheme
of this size, yes.
Okay. Um, Vanessa and then-
Can
Just a quick ques- question for clarification on those 30 complaints.
Over what timeframe and roughly how many meals would that be-
So-
... in relation to?
So, that was term four-
Right.
... um, up to last week. And, uh, we sort of,
we're averaging 200,000-
A million
a day. A week, so over 10 weeks.
A day.
200,000 a day.
So-
A day in a week.
... so fi- so a million a week?
Yeah, so about 10 million.
So, 30 out of a million?
Hmm. (laughs) Parmjeet?
So, um, first it's just verification that those complaints include, like you
mentioned-
(clears throat)
(laughs)
yeah. ... um, is there any comparison of, uh, complaints, uh, between
the previous program and the program that we have yet?
Uh, we can look at what we have, but as I said,
the, the monitoring and tracking by the Ministry-
Mm-hmm. ... of the previous program, um, was, was not as good as it should have
been. But we certainly do have complaints recorded from the last-
Okay. Thank you.
... last set-up as well.
Thank you.
As someone who, uh,
has special meals-
Mm-hmm.
... um, I appreciate the importance of, um,
labeling. But do you track
these results compared to comparable volumes
in industry? Say, for example, the percentage of complaints
airline industries get on their meals or, um, hospitals
get, et cetera? 'Cause I... You know, even though I pay for the service, um, when
I've flown and I... my prior job used to fly a lot, you know, I
regularly got mislabeled food and I was paying for it.
Mm-hmm.
Um, do you have any comparison that's a relevant comparison by
volume?
Uh, yes. I haven't brought it with me, but we are not out of whack with
other large-scale food production industries.
Mm-hmm.
All right. Thank you for that.
So that, uh, uh, I mean, just a supplementary in terms of that-
Yeah.
Um, there'd be something in the contract about that, wouldn't there?
Mm-hmm.
And so, have they been meeting their contractual obligations on
that?
Um, earlier this year they weren't meeting their contractual obligations.
That resulted in some, uh, very robust conversations
around the contract. Um, they are meeting their contractual requirements at the
moment.
So you have a... It's not 100% on things like
accurate labeling?
Uh, we've got the exact breakdown of the percentages for each category they need to
meet. Happy to provide that through.
Thank you.
Okay, moving along. Mike Butcher.
Uh, thank you, Chair. I just wanted to, um, talk about improving data collection-
Oh, I'll do it after him (laughs) .
... um, about student achievement.
Fabulous.
And, um, I guess you don't know what you don't measure at the end of the day.
But earlier, um, Alan, you talked about the, um, twice yearly
assessments-
Mm-hmm.
... and how they were critical to enable intervention to help,
um, students. Are you able to just sort of elaborate on that a little bit for
us?
Absolutely. Um, so, uh, for a
number of years, um,
schools have been, in the primary years, um, undertaking
assessments. Uh, but they're not consistent-
Yeah.
... across schools, uh, and there is a, a level of overall
teacher judgment in play.
Uh, it has meant outside of, uh, some
sampling, the system, the Ministry really
doesn't have a great view
of what's happening for children.
It also means that parents don't necessarily have a consistent
understanding of-
Yeah.
... um, how things are going progression-wise for their
children. Uh, what we are bringing in next year is
the twice yearly assessment using a new tool called
SMARTool, which we have procured.
We have procured the tool to match the
curriculum. We have not matched the curriculum to the
tool. We are pulling items out of our current
eASTL system, which some schools use.
We are creating new items that will be an
assessment tool
for the New Zealand curriculum, that will enable
teachers, importantly (laughs) , and parents to understand the
progress that children are making.
And it will be benchmarked against the curriculum.
Pauline, are there further comments you'd like to make?
Um, no, SMART is just one of the tools schools can, schools can choose
from. Um, as, as part of meeting that requirement.
They can also continue to use eASTL for one more year, um,
while we keep it open, but we-
It, it will, it will then fall over after that.
Yeah, actually, it
Sorry?
It will fall over.
The technology platform for eASTL is out of time.
Yeah.
Uh, which is why we purchased.
And PATs.
And
From NZCR.
Mike,
Well-
H- sorry. Did you have another one?
I, I, I was just, probably just gonna make note.
You know, one of the, um, one of... that has been quite common is the first time
that parents find out that their kids are one or two years behind-
Mm-hmm.
... is when they transition into the next step in their learning career.
i.e., primary through into secondary school.
Mm-hmm.
So, that will go a long way to, um, identifying that at a far earlier
stage-
Correct. Correct.
... enabling intervention.
Correct.
Yeah.
Okay. Do you wanna clarify first and then start?
Yeah, I did, sorry, what did you say about the-
Oh, s-
... NZC, uh, PAT?
Um, so schools can choose next year to use the
SMART tool, the NZCR, um,
PAT tool-
Yes.
... or e-ASTL after next year though, e-ASTL won't be
running, so they'll have the choice between the SMART tool and the PAT.
Mm-hmm. Um, and as you just mentioned
that the-
Yeah. ... tool is being made for the
curriculum, is the same thing being done for PAT
tool?
Yes, and-
And are you supporting that?
Yes, we are supporting that. Um, I believe we've provided some additional funding
to NZCR, for example, to build in, um-
To build on the writing-
... writing components.
... the writing component.
But for
the, all the areas that it will be assessing?
So, it assesses, uh, both tools ass- or, or three tools, assess reading,
writing and maths, Te Reo Rangatira, Hangarau, and the SMART tool and
e-ASTL. Um, and yes, so we're supporting, uh,
NZCR already have, um, what they need
for reading and maths, and they are updating and aligning that
the new curriculum. Uh, writing is an area they wanted to develop further, and
we've supported that with, um, contributing some funding towards the
development.
Just supplementary on that-
Yeah.
... I mean, is it still the case that it won't be a
mandatory tool, uh, next year or into the
future? The SMART tool.
Yep. So, the requirement is to use one of those tools twice a
year.
And in terms of the, um, data from the SMART tool, where
will that be held and who will have access to it?
So the data is, uh, is owned and
held in New Zealand by the Ministry, um, and
the accessibility to that is, is, um, as agreed
with schools, uh, for the Ministry to look at
system performance. Um, and more locally, of course,
schools have access to their data to report to parents and their
boards and communities.
And if, uh, who had access to it and for
what purposes were to change in the future,
what would the process for that be?
That-
I don't think we can-
No,
I don't know. ... pre-determine those processes.
Um, governments make decisions
all of the time, as decisions are made. We provide advice.
Um, but I don't think we
Yeah, I mean, uh, we hear the concern, um, that this could be used
for purposes like, for example, comparing schools-
(coughs)
... um, against each other. And I'm just wondering what assurances you can
give, um, us that that cannot
happen with this tool?
Well, we can't-
Well, we know how, we know how NZCR's is, uh, protected, for
example. Um, so I'm just wondering what is the Ministry's equivalent of
that?
Well, at the moment, there is an undertaking that it won't be
used for those purposes. Uh, if there was any intention for that to
change, we would have to be very open and transparent about that.
And ultimately, if people weren't comfortable with it, then they would use the PAT
tool.
And will you cont-
Right.
Sorry, a final-
Last one.
... supplementary on that. Um, because of course my understanding is with the PAT
tool, that's something that schools have to pay for themselves to
Mm-hmm.
Versus this one that is going to be provided to schools for
free.
So it's exactly as e-ASTL now. So e-ASTL which schools have been
using for free, the Ministry has that
data. The Ministry has always maintained
the rules of play around the use of that data.
Uh, so it's not a ch-
No, sorry, they get to choose to use one-
Yes. ... but one you will have to pay for-
Yes.
... and the other one will be free?
Yes. And it would be-
So, it's not an even playing field for schools to necessarily
choose.
Well, you can s- you th- you could argue that now schools are making choices
about whether they use e-ASTL or PAT.
Yes.
And yes, while it's not mandatory-
Well you're r- it will be mandatory
It will be mandatory, but equally um,
it's really mandatory to be reporting to parents, so they may-
Mm-hmm.
... also be paying for a different tool.
And I know schools are-
Mm-hmm.
... paying to use different tools outside of those, those as
well, and it means we don't get any consistency of picture or information
for anyone to make decisions. So, while I understand the
concern-
Mm-hmm.
... um, I can't preclude a future (laughs) a future state
where a government might make a different decision.
But right here and right now, um, neither the government nor the
Ministry has any intention of using the data from the SMART
tool to create league tables or have comparators or, or any
other, uh, purposes other than understanding system performance.
And really importantly, targeting the resources where they're
needed.
Okay. Lawrence.
Just on, um, this in terms of SMART, um,
I don't know if this is something you've-
Yeah, right.
... covered. Wh- what was the procurement process for this and why was that not
declared as part of the OIA?
Um, which OIA?
Um, there was an, there was an OIA that was submitted on SMART
tool in terms of the procurement process.
Right.
And that was delayed, delayed, delayed, rejected.
I would need-
That's that saying.
Well, I'd need to see the OIA. Like my apologies, I'm not aware of the OIA but
Pauline-
Okay, we'll put that as a follow-up.
Yes, but but Pauline, you can talk
But would you be able to tell us about
You can talk to the procurement process.
Yes, the procurement process was a standard process.
So, we went out, um, uh, and-
Same question.
... uh, peop- uh, businesses, suppliers submitted, uh, their
proposals. Uh, we went into discussion with a short
list of those, those providers, those suppliers,
uh, to see, um, you know, to see,
um, in a more detailed way how they would meet the requirements.
Um, we took that through that process, and then we
awarded, uh, the contract to the provider that best
fitted the needs and the requirements of the RFP.
Okay.
Um, any thoughts on that? Nope. Nope, okay,
so it's your primary-
I have it, great.
... primary.
Thank you so much, um, thanks Chair.
Ca- actually that segues very nicely to my
question which is, um, how many OIAs has the
Ministry of Education received this year?
Entitled to,
I have that data.
Um, how many, and yeah there is a couple of sums on top of that.
How many were from Lawrence?
Uh,
not that many-
(laughing)
... not that many. (laughing)
Come on, Lawrence.
But I, I-
If Governor's count, they count.
I did actually bring the OIA volume data with me and I looked at
You break it down, will ya? (laughs)
... and there has been a significant increase that I can
report-
I'm assuming, I
... in OIA numbers. I'm just, sorry, trying to find it in my-
Thanks, Laura.
... my, uh, pack of numbers,
Not just, not just literally one.
Did you have it to hand, Jerome?
Um, you can come back to us, that's fine.
I think what might be-
Yeah, I'll just look for it in my folder.
... um, and maybe as something we can mention in there is, it will also be
helpful to break down how many of them were, uh, extended,
requires an extension and how many of them was ultimately
rejected under, to say that, you know, the information is
not available?
I'm very happy to provide that.
Yep. So, that's fine. We'll just keep that as post-hearing question.
I know it's in, I know it's in here. The comment I can make is, there has
been a significant increase. (laughs)
I'm assuming that's as much-
Can we add, can we add a category of how many of them actually made the boat go
faster?
(laughing) Um, but the other question I have is,
um, on the subject of procurement,
and this is mainly just a question for you, if you wouldn't mind just allaying
people's concerns as well. Um, one of the
requirements for Ministry or for Government A- Agencies when it comes
to procurements is to procure local- Local business, yeah. ...
um, but we've also been told in terms of
resources, in terms of books, um,
and that they
often, local contracts have not, or even smaller contracts, not
been prioritized because there isn't sufficient, in terms of turnaround time for
them, to make something out of a proposal.
Mm.
Can I just check in terms of your procurement
process, um, when it comes, and how you're
prioritizing local?
Sure. Um, just to answer your previous question, there's been a 39%
increase in-
Oh, that's not a-
... OIAs. Um, and I do have the breakdown of refusals and so
forth as well, which we can provide to you offline.
In terms of our procurement, um, yes we do try and procure, um, from New
Zealand, but ultimately we also need to be able to procure what is needed when it
is needed. Uh, and so in situations where local
provision is not available, um, when we need it-
Yeah.
... or to specifications we require, um, we do also look
offshore.
I guess here's the, the second follow-up question-
Last one.
... is if things are happening at such a rapid pace, for example, we're gonna
implement this, we're gonna try something new-
Because-
... and their decisions are made, so locals, like I said,
doesn't have time to respond or be able to give themself, gear
themself up
and they're not available right then and you have to procure offshore, would
you then offer the availability that once they have managed to upscale
locally, to go back to a local provider as opposed to,
that's it, you've lost your opportunity, we're going offshore?
Sure, um, we always procure for a period of time.
So, um, we will always go out and re-procure which gives people that
opportunity to, um-
Interesting.
... scale up and be ready for their next procurement round.
Oh, yeah. Um-
Mm?
Willow Jean, your primary-
Thank you.
... and then we're gonna move to the next section.
Um, oop, hang on, my notes. Um, so in
October 2024 last year, the Auditor General published a report on whether
the Ministry's approach to promoting equitable educational
outcomes, um, and it was prof- informed
by comprehensive, current, reliable and relevant information.
My question is, how is the
Ministry tracking, um, in terms of
those five recommendations in that report?
Mm. Um, we have made significant
progress, uh, in terms of how we think about the data we
collect. If we look across into our contracts, we have been
re-gearing our contracts and certainly for our new contracts
requiring, um,
a different level of information around what actually the
outcome is, as a result of, of what is being spent.
So, if I look over into curriculum, um,
you know, back when I started, uh, in the curriculum space,
we'd procure professional learning and development and pretty much the information
we'd get in was, was did teachers like it?
But we had no line of sight into did that make any difference for children's
learning? Whereas the new contracts we have in place now require that
line of sight
towards impact on learning, so that's giving us a whole new level
of insight and transparency around
what's the government actually getting? What's New Zealand actually getting?
And we do break it down by different groups, um, Pauline's talk
today about some of the additional data sets we're getting in which
provide breakdowns by, uh, different groups.
Uh, we've made significant improvements to our performance
metrics. I believe we're gonna be moving from a
needs improvement rating in ESCO to a-
To good.
To good. Uh-
Woo-hoo.
... so we have been-
Nice.
... we have been quite focused on improving
how we actually monitor performance.
And so in terms of, um, achieving, uh,
the outcomes in those areas, where would you say you're at with
that? Closer to?
It's a work in progress.
Mm. Uh, and I mean, just in terms of can you
tell me what the Ministry's view is on removing the
obligations for school boards to give effect to Te Tiriti o
Waitangi, and whether that will improve equitable
outcomes?
Um-The
Ministry's view is that, uh, language and culture is
important for all children, um, to engage in
learning. It is insufficient in and of itself.
Uh, what I have seen through the removal is clearly schools still
intend to provide for language and culture, um,
which we would expect them to do. We will
continue to be providing resources through, we will
be continuing our focus on, um, the makeup of the
education workforce and having diversity in those spaces.
We will be continuing our program of work, um, in
property spaces. So, um, I
think it's opened up a conversation, but I'm not s- seeing that
it will have a- an impact one way or
another, uh, on education given that schools are
stil- still able to do so, and clearly they intend to.
Okay.
Just... Sorry, Lauren?
Supplementary.
I'll come back.
Okay.
Oh, well sorry, you were saying something and you're pointing to me.
No, well I'm pointing to Laurence now.
(laughs)
Well, no, but you didn't indicate you want another sup?
So I'll give you another sup and then I'll go to Lauren. Okay?
Thank
you. Thank you. Then we'll round it up.
I mean is Te Tiriti o Waitangi reduced to
language and culture?
Uh, I think you need to ask the question in the context of-
Well, what does the-
... either advice from the Ministry or-
Sure.
... the period-
I can answer it.
...
end. So, Section 127 was never about the entirety of Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. Te Tiriti o Waitangi is still
reflected, um, through the Education Act
and work in education around both striving for equitable outcomes for
Maori, around, um, recognizing te reo Maori and
activity to grow te reo Maori. And that is actually a national
responsibility, not just an education one, in terms of
mataranga as a taonga and in terms of our
responsibilities of providing an ob- o- uh, a separate, um,
schooling network which provides for mana motuhake through Kakara iwi and
Te Runanganui, who we have very productive work and relationships with.
That is completely separate to this discussion around Section 127.
Okay, I'm gonna actually ask a sup at that point.
Can you just, um, remind the committee the increase
in the budget, uh, in 2024/'25
for te reo Maori, um, across the board in terms
of Kura Kaupapa, the property, et cetera,
and what has been spent of that
number?
Um, so I'm actually gonna ask Jerome Shepherd, um, who is the chief
executive for the Ministry's property arm, to come and talk about the
investment that's been made for Kura.
And then I will turn to, uh, Merehina, who is my deputy secretary.
So, what I might do- just on the property is let, maybe park the property bit
'cause we've got a whole section-
Oh, okay.
... in a moment.
All right. (laughs)
Um, yeah, but i- if you don't mind, Alan.
(laughs)
Okay, Merehina.
Answer the rest of it and then I'll just...
Otherwise I'm gonna get in trouble with my own committee.
(laughs)
(laughs) That's fine. Merehina.
And then I'll, um, let Laurence ask his sup grant and then we'll go to property.
Okay, understood.
Thank you. Yep, yep.
Ka pai. So Budget '25 set aside, um, specifically, uh, for
Maori education a $36.1 million, uh,
budget. It invested in... And we're currently going
through, uh, procurement for a new program, an online,
uh, uh, teacher program, development program
for te reo Maori, for all teachers across Aotearoa.
Uh, and that's 14.7 million. Um, there was 10.1,
uh, million dollars invested in a virtual learning network, um,
targeting immersion education STEM subjects at
a secondary or wharekura level. Um, we
heard, uh, significantly how important that is, and that
will come to pass in terms of what's proposed for a future
NCEA, uh, qualification, um, an investment
in Te Reo Matatini and STEM,
um, resources again for wharekura.
So, that's 4.5 million, um, and, uh,
curriculum advisors, uh, specifically for
immersion, uh, Maori education settings, the
support with the implementation of, uh, the curriculum.
So, that's in and alongside all those other support mechanisms of various
hapai. Um, and then the development of a
new-
(coughs)
... um, Maori, uh, Te Reo Maori subject, uh, at
Years 11 to 13, uh, for the New Zealand curriculum.
And I just wanted to touch on the point also about a recommendation in terms of
equity, uh, by the, um, Office of the Auditor-General.
One of the key things that was pointed to was, um,
the lack of, uh, monitoring, uh, progress for
Maori medium or immersion education-
Mm. ... and, uh, the Ministry, uh, has recently
procured or going through that process of a new, uh,
Te Reo Mātai assessment tool that will do that.
And that's going to be fundamentally important for, as Alan said, monitoring that
progress before students get to those upper levels.
And the second part of my question was all of that spend is on track to-
Absolutely.
...
Looking forward, uh, we've been working really carefully, um,
with, uh, key players in the system, in the sector.
Uh, so looking forward to announcements and getting that
up and running next year. Also wanted to say too, in terms of
relationships with the Ministry, Waitangi Tribunal
1718, uh, one of the, uh, recommendations out of that was
Te Runanganui o Nga Kura Kaupapa Maori was mediation between them and the
Ministry. This year, Alan and the Minister and across the
Ministry, we work really hard and meet regularly.
So, to the point of, um,
the relationships in the Ministry, um, you know, I
would say that the regularity of our meetings and the fact we're not in
mediation with them, uh, points to an ongoing
commitment to and strengthening that relationship.
It's not to say it's- it's everything is easy.
Um, but if you're not together and talking that through-You know, you
can't improve on that. Tēnā koe.
Tēnā koe. So, we, uh, I wanna move to the next part ve-
very soon, so I'm gonna give an opportunity for these sups, but please keep them
fast and we'll get concise answers. Lawrence.
Just in terms of s- equity for students, one of the things that
we did see that came out, I thinks, I think from the ministry, uh, with the
changes to the qualification and the NCEA overhaul, is that it's going
to disadvantage Māori and Pacific
students. Would you be able to elaborate on that?
That was your advice, Andy?
Yes. Yes. So, um, the point that we're making there is that,
um, it's likely that in, you know, raising the standard, uh,
required for achievement, um, as per the, the, elements
of the consultation document, you would see some, um, short
term effect in terms of students, um, not being able to achieve the
qualification. But the key to all of this, of course, is that
the, I- th- the level of achievement isn't really about the assessment system,
it's about the curriculum reforms.
And so, over th- a longer period of time, you'd expect those curriculum reforms
to improve the overall level of achievement.
Uh, because of the representation of Māori and Pacific in that demographic group-
Mm-hmm.
... that's the reason for that comment.
I should clarify that that was based on the limited data
we have about current patterns of study and achievement-
Mm-hmm.
... and it does not model in any anticipated
behavior change in response to the new qualification as
proposed. So, if students study based on the,
um, expectations set in the qualification, then they, y- you would expect
to see that, that statistic to come out differently.
Right. Okay, so how are you all managing?
Sorry, just following up, how are you going to manage that?
'Cause we can't really say-
Sure.
... it's gonna disadvantage them-
Yeah.
... either short term-
Yeah,
we want- ... and say, "Well, these two years, it's just a ride up for us."
I think it's the lifetime and-
Okay.
... and probably you'd say sure.
So, so, um, we've learnt a lot from,
um, the implementation program at the last NCA change
program and lessons learnt from the curriculum change program.
We are taking a much different approach, as you will have seen from the ERO
report, in terms of the amount of support provided, the amount of resources
provided. Um, we're getting in early with young
people, so we have the trial that we've talked about today for years seven and
eight. We will be looking to take that further.
So, um, none of us have any interest in,
um, a possible projection being a reality.
(laughs)
Yeah, right.
Thanks.
Yeah, yeah. Just a quick sup. Um, I'm not sure if you
covered it with your, uh, when you addressed the, um, uh, spending in
the, in the Māori education. But earlier this year, um,
just around Waitangi, we delivered resource, uh, in
Ɣlun Te Reo, the first structural li- lit-
literacy and I think numeracy as well, I'm not sure which one-
Te Whanga Whare Ora Tāne.
... and into the, um, into a number of schools in,
Northland. Uh, and that was also, we believe, the first of its
kind.
Mm-hmm.
And how has that been u- taken up and how received?
And yeah, what's the reception been like and, and the feedback and how's it been
taken up?
Um, all really positively. There's, I think we're talking about two things,
uh, PLD for teachers and specifically for those that are teaching through the
Marae Tanga and targeting emersion, Māori emersion-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, education. So PLD, um,
opportunities and, uh, the resources themselves that you
spoke about that were distributed out, so from, um,
early readers and, and, and-
Mm-hmm.
... all of that assistance around with teachers and also with
Ƅangaro.
Has there been well, well, uh, been good uptake and well received or?
Yes, and ongoing.
Thank you.
And ongoing and being informed by what works, why, what doesn't work.
So, I think back to the, the OAG report about what the ministry
needs to be clear about in terms of, um, equitable outcomes is being
informed. So, as we're rolling things out, um, we are
being intuitive to, to the feedback and what teachers, uh, and
those-
What
works, what- ... at the coalface are saying works and doesn't work.
Thank you.
And, and, and adjusting, um, quickly.
Fantastic. Final quick sup.
Thank you.
(laughs)
Um,
last year we saw the cutting of Te Aho o te Reo Māori,
um, around $30 million and that funding being redirected
into those very maths resources that we've just been talking
about. Uh, earlier you mentioned a new
professional learning development program that you are offering.
Can you please, um, detail what that is
and how much money?
Uh, 14.7 million over four years and it is
targeting-
So,
Yeah. Up, up to 51,000 teachers and kaiako across
the country. It's being very specific to
an appropriate and, um,
supportive use of Māori language as a part of, of
teaching and that's, that's really important.
And we-
And, and we are building Te Reo Māori sequences into New Zealand curriculum for the
first time.
Which will also have a range of resources around it.
So, we're still investing in Te Reo Māori-
Mm-hmm.
... we're just looking at different mechanisms for doing so.
Okay. Sorry, when you said up to 51,000, so who is eligible
for that PLD? 'Cause that's obviously not
everybody.
All teachers, um, nought to 13.
So, ca- but capped at 51,000, is it?
So, you've pointed that out.
Yeah, yeah and we'll, we will monitor and continue to progress it.
So, there's 70,000 school teachers.
A significant number had already gone through Te Aho o te Reo,
so it's pretty good reach.
But no more for them? So-
Who've been through Te Aho o te Reo, that was a very intensive program,
um-
Yeah. But with more levels, right?
So, you're saying right to the end of those levels?
Well, this will also, um, go up to those levels and those teachers can access this
as well if they want to go up further. Okay, thank you.
Um, we will move now on to part five,
property, school property, um, so we'll welcome back to the
table-
Um, and Vanessa Wenig's got the first primary.
Thank you very much, Chair. (laughs)
Aww.
(laughs) Awesome.
Right. Thank you very much. Um, so I think it's fair to say there's
pretty strong public interest in the school property
portfolio.
(clears throat) Mm, yeah.
Um, all of us have got, um, electorates are very, very much getting,
um, feedback constantly from the community about, um,
schools and what they think of the ministry and various things.
Um, so, um, in terms of that, what can you tell us
about, um, some of the decision-making
criteria and planning tools that are used to
inform the ministry about the schools
need to be planned in the future, and what the timeline
horizon is for that?
So,
as the committee be aware, last year w- there was a school property review
undertaken. And as a result of that, um, a number of, um,
initiatives were put in place as improvement initiatives.
Um, one of those was the Value for Money initiative, which was actually w-
where we've been designing stuff that's bespoke.
It's got costs associated. It doesn't have educational benefits.
Yeah.
Um, and even this year, we've been able to save 200 million by driving towards
standardization approach. So that's been quite a significant
change. Um, just this year, we, I came on board as the functional chief
exec. It's a, a weird sort of, um, construct, but it's
part to support us moving into a s- new entity next
year. So this a, a key change for us, and we're part of the, um,
Education and Training Amendment Bill that went into the House three weeks ago,
I think, now. So there'll be sort of some key initiatives.
As part of that, we had a ministerial advisor group set up.
Um, uh, in the last, uh, the period of
this, um, committee's looking at, um, we had significant budget funding
put into, um, into school property because one of the things where it had, um,
an issue, which is maintenance. We didn't actually have enough money to
maintain our asset base. The '24 budget put
780 million extra into maintenance, and another 100 million as
part of budget '25. So quite significant funding's been gone
in- into it. Um, we, the government just recently
agreed to a program which was the, um, Accelerated Maintenance Program.
So we gave every school in New Zealand, um, 50% of their nor-
annual property maintenance grant.
And this is the stuff that actually maintains our assets, so this is
the cleaning, washing, painting.
Um, and, you know, the schools are spending that right now.
So that, that was about $58 million.
So that, you know, that's been a significant, um, increase, uh,
for those schools. And on top of that, we have now looking at a sort of
a s- a differentiated services for school.
We know that a number of small schools, schools with new principals,
uh, really struggle with the property content.
Mm-hmm.
And so we, um, as part of that accelerated maintenance was actually a focus
on about 900 odd small and remote schools, which will
get a greater wraparound service.
So really, we'll be providing most of the m- the capital
maintenance activities for those schools.
So it'll, it'll c- they'll cover curra right through to some of our larger
but more remote cir- secondary schools.
So that's the sort of breadth where we are at the moment.
Um, we're still a, a prioritized based program.
We have a program where every school gets a, every five years, a drop of funding
directly for them. It's prioritized on, you know, it's based on a
formula-based project. Do you want me to finish up?
No, keep going.
Okay, sorry.
(laughs)
I was just saying-
Go
ahead. ... it's based on a formula base, which is, you know, you prioritize health and
safety, essential infrastructure and such, and if there's a, um, a,
um, additional funding, the ministry or the school property provides supplementary
funding on that so schools, you know, should be able to fix that.
We've got some systemic issues in our portfolio that we're moving through, the, the
'90s and early 2000s leaky building-
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
... um, issue. We're getting pretty close to the end of that-
Mm.
... which is great. We're addressing those.
That's, but that's been, that's taken out probably one and a half billion dollars
to deal with that one issue-
Mm.
... which means actually the money hasn't been spread across our asset base.
We had the Christchurch earthquake, and that obviously drove-
Mm.
... some focus of funding. So we're actually in a position where we can, uh, you
know, reallocate funding to maintain stuff rather than address
disasters and systemic issues.
Okay, thank you. I'm going to go to Vanessa.
(laughs)
Can I just say this is probably the biggest slate of lineup of questions waiting
I've had all day-
(laughs) Okay. ... and it's the sho- shortest part.
Yeah.
So let's just keep them quick. Keep the answers quick and keep it moving.
Yeah. Okay. So what I was really asking was, who does the future planning for the schools
that we're going to need in the future, as well as the criteria around
w- where new schools might go?
Yeah.
Is that up to you guys or is there someone else now?
That's the Ministry of Educa- so-
Well, yeah.
Jerome is still part of the Ministry of Education.
Okay.
Um, if a Crown entity is set up post the legislation
passing, the responsibility for network planning will remain with the
ministry. Um, and we have a range of criteria, um,
around, uh, population need and growth.
Uh, we rely on a range of demographic projections, conversations with
territorial local authorities around, um, where they are seeing,
uh, need projected and then we work now and with our
property arm and we would work in with the, um, Crown entity as well on that.
So it remains with you-
Yes.
... for future planning-
... and it's going to stay that way in the future.
Um, and so if we have questions about, um, specific
places, would the best places to be to direct that for
communities who are asking, there's probably a few of us-
Yeah.
... um, feed back to the ministry in our local areas or through...
Yep, thank you.
Okay. Um, Lawrence, you've got a sup?
Yep, just have one very quick sup. Um, I've been told that
there's no intention to purchase new land in the Tamaki, Auckland
region for new schools. Would you be able to con- confirm if that's-
No, no. No, that's, that's incorrect. We know there's dyna- we know, uh-...
you know, growth in New Zealand's not great, but there's dynamic growth going
on. Uh, Jury, you know, we're probably gonna buy eight sites there.
Sorry.
Kermadec, there's large growth. So, there's, yeah, there's, there's no
doubt that we'll need significant number of sites there.
Okay, cool.
Still on?
Um, Mike Butcher.
Uh, thanks, Chair.
Yeah, just a question around, you referred to the modular classrooms driving costs
down. Is it correct that at the end of 2023, the average cost per classroom was
1.2 million, and mid-2025 it was down to
about 620 odd thousand, effectively half?
Yeah. S- so, we, um, so at that stage, the cost was 1.2 for
general classroom and we've been able to, uh, get, uh, you know, for
general classrooms down to as low as 650.
Yep.
We do have a valid benchmark around 850. Every school's different.
I know.
Sizes are, sites are different.
And do you anticipate that there will be, um, more cost savings,
potential cost savings going forward, in terms of price per square meter?
We are trying to use the weight of our, our $2 billion spend a
year-
Mm-hmm.
... to get cuts on, um, materials.
Of
We are also at the moment fortunate 'cause the, the, um, uh, the
construction industry is-
It's
suppressed. ... um, a bit suppressed, so we are getting great deals there as well.
Right.
Yeah.
Um, Parmjeet, sup?
Yeah. So with the open plan classrooms, uh, coming to an end,
what does that mean for the, uh, property portfolio and going
forward, what is-
Mm-hmm.
So, the majority of all, um, our classrooms in New Zealand are, are
cel- cellular in nature. Um, we're doing an exercise at the moment with a
number of schools to look at where they want to...
Th- they've had open plan and they're looking back to make it back to a more
cellular or more flexible options.
So, um, you know, that in some sense that's quite an expensive exercise if it has
heat, heating implications or ventilation implications.
So, we're looking at a, a range of standard solutions for, for that.
And, and rolling that out over, you know, in the new year and such.
But at the moment, we're just piloting some of the options for doing that.
Okay.
Willow-Jean, sup?
Two very quick sups. How much of the two billion initially paused
indefinitely has now been unpaused?
So, we had a range of, um, projects where, that we
went through last year, about 400.
I've got the actual numbers, excuse
me.
(pauses) Yeah. So, uh,
in, uh, in 2024, we hit about 352 projects,
um, that went through the value for money review.
Uh, since then, uh, since that review, um, we've been going
through and, you know, reforming our practices.
Uh, we actually proceeded with about 177 of those.
Um, 145 lower value ones have been put on
hold or canceled. Um, in a lot of, in a lot of areas
actually, uh, this has been decisions on we've changed track.
Either the growth hasn't occurred in those, so there's been quite good valid
reasons for the stoppage. Um, there are about 30 projects at
moment, residual projects, where partial funding has been provided because the
solution we've agreed on is a value for money solution.
So, um, in most instances we've hit all, we will have hit all
the high priority ones but, um, there are a number that have been canceled, yes.
And, and just in terms of the school property projects that have been announced,
um, in the review period, what percentage of them are completely new
ones and what percentage were simply continuing
projects?
I can give you the exact numbers. I don't have them with me because-
Okay, so rough? You've got some rough
So, so I mean mine... Well, um, because our, our
funding is we get about 1.2, uh, billion dollars in depreciation and
we get about six to eight hundred in capital, um, in new money as part of the
budget process. The majority is always the maintenance projects just tick
on, so it's actually always gonna be, um, business
as usual for the majority of our projects.
If I could get the specifics-
Yeah.
... um, on that, on my question, and it was about the property projects
announced.
Yeah.
Um, and which ones were simply a restart and which
ones are completely new.
Yep.
Um,
sup from me on this section,
how big was the unfunded wish
list, uh, that essentially the current government had to
inherit for projects-
(laughs)
... like Te Paepae-o-Atea in Hāwera where a new
school was promised and not funded by the previous
government? So, how, how big was the, the, as I say, the unfunded
wish list of projects-
Mm-hmm. ... like that? And for schools like Te
Paepae-o-Atea, how long do you think it will
take for real clarity, um, to be provided
to the local community, um, around
when projects like, um, their
school redevelopment will be able to be completed realistically?
Yeah. So if I a- answer the second one first is that, um, in the new year
we're, um, intending to publish where schools are on a
redevelopment life cycle. So, the idea is that a school knows-
Right.
... if we've gone through a master planning exercise, there's been a level of
expectation, where am I? It may, it might not be, it won't be funded
necessarily, but they'll know where they are, what, when's the next step, and that
we'll be publishing that. So that's the answer to that first, second question.
The first one I need to, I need to go back and find out the actual numbers.
Okay.
Yeah.
So we'll, um, put that as a follow up.
Um,
and we'll, we'll leave that there.
I'm gonna move on to-
Quick, quick sup on this?
I'm gonna go to primaries 'cause I've got a line up and we're gonna run out of time
guys.
All right.
So Mike, Hannah, uh, and then Lawrence, and if we can keep
them moving.
Yep.
Thanks, Chair. I just wanted to talk about, um, the potential impact of the new
procurement rules-
I think the mic's for
you. ... um, effective first of December this year.
Try it.
71 down to 47. Um, do you
envisage A, cost savings, um, and also that
there'll be a, an uptick in-
That's what he thought.
... local builders, et cetera, being eligible and perhaps winning
tenders?
Yeah. So o- one of the things, we're s- we're, we're the biggest tenderer
government.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So if you ever go on GETS-
Yeah.
... there's school property projects. So we-...
most of our pro— all our projects basically are done by locals.
The local plumber-
Right.
Mm-hmm.
... the local chippy, um, the caretaker- Yeah.
So, you know, it's always been very much local.
When we get to things like materials, this is the, the, the direction we're
going. I mean, obviously the biggest one that was a direction made by government
was to go to wool. So, you know- Yes.
it's, we've found it slightly hard because there's not a wool body like there used
to be in the old days, so you're actually still going through manufacturing
companies. But we're, we're talking to, uh, companies like Ortex that do both
synthetic and wool about which products can we put into our
schools, and we're cr- really keen to progress that.
At the moment, the only product for the ground is
unfortunately an Ortex, I mean a, a, a carpet tile that is
not wool-based because the other ones don't...
Wool-based ones seem, have issues with basic, you know,
um, wear. Um, they have, uh, problems with actual collection
of, um, insects and, and such. Mm-hmm.
But we know insulation is, is one where we're gonna be boosting it up with
use of, use of wool and such. So that, that, you know, the carpet tile being one is
probably the most, one that's probably in front of most people thinking, "Well, we
can use carpet." It's actually problematic for our kids because they're sitting on,
lying on our carpets, and we don't have a wool, a wool solution that's
cost-effective that we've found to date.
Okay.
(laughs)
You're always welcome to come to Whanganui Electric where wool carpets are made and
we can have a look and see what they can do for you (laughs) . (laughs) Um...
Ana, your question.
Thank you. Um, my question is kind of supplementary
off, um, Jan and it... Please let me know if I'm-
Just fire away.
... saying with the ECE budgets within (techno music plays)
... (techno music plays) kohanga
Just one of my biggest, um, constituent-based
concern has been around kohanga reo properties.
Um, and upon researching in the Ministry of Education's 2025
annual report on page 165, it says that
there was a $211
million, 7% under budget mainly due
to the $173 million
of funding approved in Budget 2025.
That leaves us still with a $38 million
underspend. Now my question here relates to kohanga
reo. Uh, kohanga reo buildings remain in poor condition
after decades of under-investment.
They're not just an early childhood, early childhood education
center. They're the beginning and heart of Maori language and revival
and cultural survival. Te Punu Kōkiri has identified
172 centers at risk,
and there are 55 kohanga property projects ready
to go. But funding has only been given for 10
of them.
So, it is estimated that the 45 properties
would cost around $30 million, if you can see where I'm going with this
(laughs) . Um, one, where has that $38 million underspend
gone? And two, why can't some of that budget allocation be used to fund the
remaining kohanga reo property projects?
So, um, the, uh, uh, allocation of
funding to kohanga reo property is, um, not done via the p- the property
agency.
It's an operating grant which we give directly to kohanga, so just to clarify-
Is it 8.3 million?
Uh, yes, I believe so. Yeah. So, um, that is a decision the government
could look at and, you know, we work very closely with kohanga as I mentioned
before, and, um, uh, we are, um,
you know, open to suggestions from-
(coughs)
... from anyone who, who has a particular funding need that they think needs to be
met. Um, that isn't to say, of course, that it's possible to fund
everything through Budget.
So that's a decision that's made at each Budget essentially.
In terms of the 38 million, we will come back to-
It's ECE.
Yes, that's right. We will come back to the committee with clarification on-
Mm-hmm.
... on the reason for that. I think, um, that's
a forecast-driven appropriation.
Gotcha.
And so when our forecast is over, for whatever reason, the
money goes back to the Treasury as opposed to being available for us to
spend. So we unfortunately can't quite do the, the shift that you're
talking about.
Yeah.
Thanks. Thank you.
Okay. Um, Lawrence.
Thank you. Uh, just a short question.
Um-
It's really heartening to hear that, uh, there has been the easing of where
the end of the leaky buildings and all of those and some of the funding can be cut.
Does that mean that, um, through the new property agency or through
MoE, that you will not consider, um, any
more than current settings privatization of school property?
So as part of the, as part of the school, um, setup at school
agent, the, um, the land remains in the, um, in the name of the Crown.
So there's no change to ownership.
Yeah.
It's only administration.
But in terms of the property itself.
Yeah. So for land, we've been a great supporter of treaty settlements, as you'll be
aware.
I mean, yeah, most treaty settlements we've got across the line because we've been
able to, um, sell school sites and lease them back into perpetuity, and we're very
proud of that contribution that we've made in that space.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So, you know, in some sense, we've, we've been really lucky in that space.
Um, we have some PPP schools.
That's (techno music plays)
We still own the land or, or the iwi own the land.
Um, it's accommodation only. Teaching and learning can take place.
It's really like having a full s- facilities management.
Mm-hmm.
It's not really an ownership. At the end, we own those a- a- those
assets. By the end of the 25 years when the PPP finish, they'll return
those assets fully re- full ownership returns to the Crown.
Okay.
But are there any new, uh, PPPs being planned?
Not at this stage.
Cool. Thank you.
Um, moving to part six. Willow-Jane, your
question.
Thank you. Just to call absolute completeness in this
line of questioning, um, I asked earlier about any
verbal or written instructions about, uh,
removing, replacing, uh, using less te reo
Maori and references to Aotearoa.
I asked about the ministry and the answer was no.
I asked about the minister and the answer was no.
Was there any from the minister's office-
A- again, not- not that I can recall, but I'm- I
am really happy if there are specific examples to- to follow those
up. I can't... Right here and now, I can't think of any.
Okay. Clear. Lawrence.
Thank you. Um, in terms of current events, um, I know we discussed this
a- a tiny bit, but asbestos in both EC and
schools. Um, now, there was a direction given by
the Ministry early on, and I understand this is still under m-
consideration, that the Ministry would not pay for the,
um, cost, even though students have to follow all the very stringent
guidelines set out by the Ministry and WorkSafe.
And we were asked this question before, earlier this morning with WorkSafe.
Um, what are some of the... 'Cause it is quite extensive and some of the schools
are gonna be tens of thousand dollars out of pocket.
What are some of the considerations now from the Ministry on potentially
supporting the schools or with some of the- covering for some of the cost?
Um, we are looking at some options.
Right.
Um,
we haven't made decisions yet, but we are looking at some options.
Would you know even roughly when you'll
be able to provide some clarity to-
Not today.
... the schools in... Not today.
(laughs) Great. Okay, we'll put that as a follow-up question.
That'd be great. Thank you.
There's no other questions. We can go to your concluding remarks, if
you've got any.
(laughs)
Oh, you're like, "Oh."
I- I didn't realize I- I had the opportunity-
... to make concluding remarks. Um, thank you,
uh, to the committee for your time, for your thoughtful questions.
Um, I recognize that it is a significant investment in time
for all of you. Um, and myself and my team
appreciate, um, both the time taken and the way the committee has
been conducted. So, uh, thanks to you all.
You're welcome.
Well, thank you, Alan. Uh, congratulations again-
Yes.
... from all of us. Um, all the best for your team having a
safe, um, and enjoyable Christmas.
Uh, and we look forward to engaging with you all in the new year.
Okay.
Members-
And this won't be the last time we will be seeing-
I'm gonna give you a 10-minute break before the Ministers, uh,
s- join us at 5:00. So, we'll sit down at 5:00 to
Minister.
... to go. You can do this, Vinay sir. You can do this.
Well, not quite the last hour.
... in place, delivered every other curriculum area which is now out for
consultation. We are delivering an assessment tool, uh, that you've
been talking about today, I have no doubt, smart assessment tool.
We've delivered a phonics check, both in Te Reo Māori and in English.
Uh, we're delivering a math check next year.
That's our s- our, uh, assessment part.
We have delivered a s- significant pedagogical shift to the science of learning,
explicit teaching and direct instruction across the board with 22,000 teachers
trained in explicit, uh, structured mathematics, 30,000 in structured
literacy. We've mandated obviously structured literacy across the country, I think
the first country in the world to do that.
A significant boost to learning support, 750 million, uh,
which is transformational for those ORS children.
A learning support coordinator for every school rolled out over the next three
years. A massive, uh-
Yeah.
... injection of teacher aide hours, uh, and intervention teachers of course in
literacy and mathematics. Uh, we're supporting the workforce of the future, of
course, uh, with a hu- all of that professional learning and development, a
principal aspiring, a sp- aspiring principal program, uh, we're paying
teacher, uh, registration fees as you know.
But a really, uh, important part which we don't often talk about is the data part
and I think maybe you may have been talking about it earlier today around the fact
that the Ministry have done an extraordinarily good j- job-
Mm-hmm.
... under our direction of making sure that we are
contracting properly with agreed outcomes and an
outcomes framework, uh, proper evaluations, not
just, "Did you like the thing?" But actually, "What was the outcome for the child
with that service and that, uh, that contract?" Very
much shifting to an outcomes framework, uh, and it is really important because it's
been able... Uh, we've been able to identify things that are not working or things
that are really expensive, uh, that aren't getting the gains that we want and
funnel that into frontline resource that makes a difference for our
kids. And the outcomes have been clear this year.
So far, the very early signs in early reading and phonics have been extraordinary,
and the same with mathematics. And the key part of this is not just raising out,
uh, achievement of course, but closing the equity gap.
And the thing I'm most proud of is that all of the results sh- so far, the
children who have benefited the most are our Māori and Pacifica
kids. And that that is extraordinary because it is the first time in a very long
time we have seen consistently across the board a raising, uh, a closing
of the gap and raising achievement for students, uh, not only Māori and
Pacifica but also in our high equity index or low decile schools as
well. Those are the children that need an education the most to change their ou-
their life trajectory and their outcomes, and I'm extraordinarily proud of what
we've achieved, but I owe all of that
to our teachers and our educators and our principals.
And I want to say before I finish to them, thank you so very
much for all the hard work that you've put in over the last couple of years.
It has been a huge amount of hard work.
Those 60,000 children who start school every year now have the benefit of a
world-leading curriculum, amazing supports, incredible teachers, wonderful
resources that are curricul- curriculum-aligned.
And now we're starting to see the outcome of all of that hard work.
And the very final thing that I would like to say is I'm very, very pleased, uh,
about the appointment of Ellen McGregor-Reid as the dep- uh, as the
che- as the... Oh my gosh.
(laughs)
(laughs) The Chief Executive, uh, of, uh, education.
Um, she's worked in the Ministry for a very long time, uh, and, uh, she's an
excellent appointment and I'm, I'm very much forward to working with her for the
next year.
(speaks Māori)
And beyond.
Mara Jane.
Kia ora. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Kia ora, Minister.
Uh, since you made the decision to remove, uh, Te Tiriti o
Waitangi obligations from school boards-
(laughs)
... there have been over 1,500 schools
who have
sent letters and reaffirmed their commitment to Te Tiriti
o Waitangi that's 60... More than 60% of the schools in New
Zealand
have said that. Do you think that you got it wrong?
No. We made it very, very clear to schools what they needed to
do. And the first thing is raise Māori achievement,
make sure there are equitable outcomes, take all reasonable steps to provide Te Reo
Māori, uh, and to take reasonable steps to ensure that their policies and practices
reflect New Zealand's cultural diversity.
So culture, language, uh, but most importantly raising achievement for Māori
students. W- we're not, of course, removing any school's
ability to, uh, uphold the Treaty if they desire to do
so. Uh, it is a choice for them and they are choosing to do that, but
I want to be very clear to boards that the legal responsibility
sits with the Crown
and iwi Māori.
That is correct.
And I take that very, very seriously-
I
know you do. ... which is why you have seen the immense, uh,
investment into Māori education and now you're starting to see the results for
those Māori kids.
Supplementary.
Um, Minister, what advice did you get from the Ministry of Education about
the removing of that section, uh, from the Education and Training Act?
I got a range of advice and some of the advice, of course, came from, uh, the
Treaty Principles Review that had been done as well, which is not publicly
available yet. Uh, but that also indicated that, uh, it was,
uh, questionable whether or not a board of trustees, which is very far removed from
the Crown should hold a legal treaty obligation.
Uh, and in the end, Cabinet took a decision that, uh, it was the
Crown's responsibility that we take very seriously.
It's laid out in Section 32 and in Section 4D, I
think, from memory, of the Education Act, uh, that I hold myself
accountable to, which is why I will continue to track Māori results,
uh, and continue to make sure that they are made publicly available.
Final sup-
Sup- thank you. So given that you said you take your Treaty responsibilities really
seriously, did you just consult yourself and your Cabinet
colleagues on this change or did you actually,
uh, consult your Treaty partners in partnership with them?
What is not at question here is the importance of the Treaty of Waitangi.
I think there is a, an argument that's been had-
Could you talk to your partner about that?
... that is actually talking about... Uh, I'm answering a question.
All right,
Minister, finish. Uh, we're talking, you know, at cross-purposes a lot of the time with this debate
that's happening. This was never a question about the importance of the Treaty.
I've already stated very clearly in my op-ed, which I put out as we made this
decision, that that is not disputable and
we take that very seriously. But there is a,
a, a of serious question about the legal obligation
of a board of trustees, very far removed from the Crown, who are-
But close to schools.
... you know, essentially, uh, parent volunteers, and we always said it is up to
schools if they wish to, to confirm that.
As long as they are doing the things that we ask of them, which are very clearly
laid out, raise Maori achievement, offer Te Reo Maori, and be
culturally responsive. Uh, over and above that, if schools wish
to uphold the Treaty, um, as they've, as many have reconfirmed their
position, then they are free to do so.
Okay. I think we've canvassed this issue a lot today.
I'm going to move on to the next primary on a new topic.
That's supplementary.
I'm, I'm giving you the opportunity to ask the new primary on a new topic.
Otherwise, I'm going to go to one of my colleagues over here.
Uh, no. I think this is important though, too.
Just one sup on this, because of something the minister has just-
Mm.
... received in response to the minister.
Final sup-
Thank
you so much. ... and then we're moving to your new primary.
Um, I'm just curious to know in terms of what you said, in terms of boards being
made up of volunteers, et cetera, that's not disputable.
But what I'm checking is if you think it's the Crown's
responsibility to uphold Te Tiriti o Waitangi
and it shouldn't be the responsibility of the board, is the Crown also looking at
taking the responsibility of the limited liability for health and
safety away from school boards as well?
Because granted, that is a far more serious consequence for board and
board members, I have seen in various schools, than the idea
of upholding Te Tiriti. And the fact there's still you have to uphold for a Human
Rights Act. Would that be something the Crown is considering, to take away their
limited liability and make it Crown's responsibility?
No.
So, then why-
But, uh, sorry, that was the answer, and I said, "What last sup?"
So, do you want to ask a new primary, Lawrence?
Yeah. Um, thank you, uh, Chair. Just in terms of the primary, one of the
things that I wanted to, um, check with you,
Minister, is around the consultation for the changes
to, um, the curriculum and also-
Please.
... what's being done on the curriculum front.
And I've got a couple of sups on this.
The first question is-
Okay. ... um, what sort of consultation have you done with, uh, has the m-
has you, as the minister, has the minister done with universities and
UE when it comes to the changes to NCEA
and-
I've le-
... subject lists?
Yeah. I've left this up to the ministry. So, I don't personally consult.
I mean, I obviously talk to people in my everyday life as the minister, but,
uh, this has really been left to the ministry.
Um, I've tasked them with that, uh, and they have been undertaking that, and I
think that they answered earlier today about the consultation that's been underway
for many years. I mean, this
curriculum change has been ongoing for like the thick end of 10 years when it's
only finally been delivered. But, uh, it has been ongoing for a long time, and the
ministry have been undertaking that for a very long time.
And in terms of, again, the changes to the curriculum that
the minister has ann- announced and the scrapping of NCEA, um, there
has been data been suggesting that the changes would mean that
it would disadvantage Maori and Pasifika students in the short term.
How would the minister then address the, that particular
concern?
Mm-hmm. Only if we let them.
Oh.
And I'm not prepared to do that, which is why I have been putting a huge amount of
resource into ensuring that children are ready.
Because what we've been conti- continuing to do over the last, uh, you know, since
NCEA was, uh, uh, put in place, is
continually, continually lowering the bar so children can get across it.
Now, that is not a good place to be. I want to raise the bar, of course.
Every parent wants their child to have a qualification that is meaningful and that
leads to something that enriches their lives and means they can live the life they
want. And as long as we continue to lower the bar to get students to step
across it in the name of equity or something, we're doing them a huge disservice.
It is really important to me to make sure that those children can reach a higher
bar. Higher expectations and a higher bar, which is why we're doing this entire
reform program, which is why you're seeing the new curriculum, the new assessment,
the new pedagogical approach, all of the professional learning and development, the
fact-
Mm-hmm.
... that every single child has a math textbook and workbook in their hands.
That is why we're putting in place the, uh, the maths...
We just did the maths trial with that intensive tutoring, so we can catch kids up
really quickly, so they can get across the bar.
And I would say again, in that maths trial, the kids who did the best
were our Pasifika kids.
Mm-hmm.
Were then our Maori kids. So, actually, uh, we are making sure that
no one is left behind and that they can reach that bar.
Of course if we did none of that and just raised the bar, of course.
I mean, that's kind of what happened with, uh, literacy and numeracy, uh,
co-requisite if you think about it.
When it was put in place, it was like, "Boom, here it is, good
luck." But none of the work was done to get kids to where
they needed to be. And we learned from that lesson, and we weren't prepared to do
it again. Now we're putting in place, of course, a writing tool as well to make
sure that those basic foundational skills of reading, writing, and maths are
all in place, so that children can meet a higher bar.
Because every single parent wants that, their children, and for us to
have higher expectations of their children and their children to meet that bar.
Can I just-
Okay. ... check, one last sup.
Last-
Um, I don't deny what the minister's doing in terms of, um, some of
the funding, and particularly, we've been talking to ERA on other things and some,
some of the focused funding that's been done.
Mm-hmm.
But that's also on the basis that there is a continuation of that funding.
Because what we-
Mm-hmm.
... then don't want to see is when the funding goes and yet we're gonna
be going back, reverting back. So-
I understand.
... would the minister be able to sustain-
Mm-hmm.
... that-... same level of funding-
Yeah.
I- ... into the future to ensure we get an outcome.
I think if you look at our track record in government so far, you can see what we
have done. Every single year, we have built on
what works. We did a trial for maths.
Now, we're funding at the tune of 40 mil- million-odd dollars to make sure that
15,000 children next year will get it.
Uh, we have introduced those literacy and numeracy, uh, intervention teachers.
Every single year, we have funded more and more curriculum,
uh, supports, uh, support staff at the ministry.
Uh, I think we have an (coughs) excellent track rec- track record of
investing more and more into the front line to change the lives of those children.
But the most important part of all this is going to be that assessment tool.
'Cause we have to assess them and their progress to catch them when they fall.
Uh, and I, I know you've talked about it earlier today, but we are...
there will be a range of tools available so that we can, as a system,
know, uh, how we're tracking, but also individual schools know,
"Hey, there are a range of students who are falling behind." Then we
come in with our supports, whether it's reading, writing, maths, uh, to make sure
that we catch them, that they are ready. This is a whole-of-system reform.
We have left nothing untouched.
Right. Tanji Pamer.
Yes, thank you, Minister. Uh, the curriculum, uh, refresh obviously is a
huge, huge, uh, undertaking. And, uh, the response that we have heard
so far is really positive. So, what I'm keen to know is that, uh,
in this process-
(laughs)
What?
Yeah. So-
So, the- there must have been some challenges.
And are you able to assure us that all the challenges have been overcome
so that this positive change
??????
Yeah. Well, we've learned a lot through the process.
Uh, uh I mean, uh, the big challenge, of course, was, uh, when you're writing a
curriculum, um, you know, we started off with lots of different people
involved. Uh, and we found that, you know, nobody agrees when you're writing a
curriculum.
(laughs) (laughs)
It's really hard to... You know, you've got the- this expert and that expert and
this expert, and then trying to come to a, a place where they all
agree is really tough. Uh, and you can see through some people saying, "Oh, you
know, what I wrote is not, you know, is not there in the curriculum." And that is
always the case when you've got multiple people, multiple
experts, multiple writers. Then we've got AERO, who've been keeping an eye on it,
and they've got a principal leadership group who've been involved as well.
And then we've got a- another group, uh, who come in over time.
Then we've got the correct-
Probably just some-
... the Curriculum Oversight Group.
There are so many people involved in this, you know, it is really hard
to make sure that every single person's bit is in there.
And so, you know, we've tried to come through the middle and compromise.
Uh, but now of course we're out for consultation. It is genuine consultation.
And you saw from English and maths when we put that out-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, we made changes before it went live.
And then we said to the sector, "Hey, use it for a year.
Let us know how it goes." Uh, and if there are things that need to be shifted,
moved, changed, tweaked, we will do that. And that's exactly what we've done.
So this consultation is genuine. Um, I- and like one of the things
that I know though, one of the other things I know that we need to do, and we have
done it now, is make sure that our leaders are supported to
implement strategic change. And so that's why it's been really important for
us to look at the contracts for beginner principals, make sure that they are
robust, but also for the first time in a really long time have an aspiring
principals program so that we are ensuring that, uh, this- next year we'll
have 200 going through it for the first time in a long time, uh, that we are
properly, uh, preparing our principals, uh, for things like
this.
Okay.
Good.
Um, sup from Willa-Jean.
Yeah. Thank you, Minister. You were just touching on the curriculum there and the,
um, process to developing the curriculum.
Um, I just wanted to know, uh, how much has Learning First been
paid to contribute to this process?
I have no idea that's operational.
But, um, they've been really integral in making sure that we are internationally
benchmarked. Uh, it is a, a big undertaking to ensure that
the, the level of mathematics, for example, uh, we're on par-
That's interesting.
... with the rest of the, the rest of the world. I mean, I know...
I, I can think of one thing. It's a relatively straightforward thing, but I know
that, you know, we're only taking
Sorry, did you say they did one thing?
No, no. I said I can think of one thing that has changed in the maths curriculum
around international benchmarking, uh, where we were only
teaching our primary school kids up to their 10 times tables and every other
country does, uh-
Oh my God.
... up to 12. In fact, they do it far earlier than we have even suggested in this
curriculum. That's just an example.
Um, international benchmarking and making sure that the language is really tight
and clear. So, I can't tell you how much they-
Okay.
... they've been paid. That's operational.
And we can put that as a follow-up question.
We'll take a second sup, Willa-Jean.
I'll second sup on that. What is your understanding of how much involvement they've
had?
I'll just run you through that. They have been helping us with international
benchmarking and making sure language is tight-
For every curriculum
As far as I'm aware, but I'm... it's operational, so I don't...
And we did have this answered earlier.
You did meet with, uh, Ben Jensen from Learning First, so maybe you've
conversations with him?
Yeah, I've met with Ben Jensen. He's a lovely man.
Right. We're
going to move on to a- But I don't, I don't... this is operational, so I, I can't tell you what he's been
working on.
We've had it answered earlier in the day. We're going to move to Brian from Front.
Yeah. Thanks, uh, thanks, Chair. Look, obviously the reforms you've undertaken
have, um, generated a lot of interest across the, the country and obviously,
one, the importance of education cannot be un- underestimated and stated, as you've
said. And so I'm just, uh, curious as to the reaction you've had and feedback from
parents and students, particularly as you've gone out around the, the country and
so forth. You know, because, you know, this is a big undertaking.
Uh,
frankly, it's been a little bit overwhelming. The parents...
and I mean, I've actually printed out some emails from, from teachers and
principals, in case anyone asked.
But around, uh, parents, there isn't a
day go by that I don't get stopped on the street and told a story or-
Mm-hmm. ... someone sitting next to me on the plane or wherever I am.
And one particular, um, grandmother actually st-
uh, sticks out because she came to me and she was almost in tears and she said, "My
eight year old didn't learn to read." He was dyslexic and he never learned to
read. And, you know, he thought that, you know, that, that options for his life
were going to be limited because he... You know, what children tend to think.
Uh, and now he's been using structured literacy this
year. He has learned to read. She said to me, "I cannot
stop him from reading." And now he wants to be a scientist.
And it's, like, just little stories like that that just......
make you realize, through all of the, (laughs) the noise-
Yeah, it is. ... this is why we're doing it.
That's right.
We're fighting for our kids to make sure that they have the very best shot in life.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and the early data, while it is just early, is, is
backing up what parents are telling me.
That's
right. And especially when I get parents saying, "I had a child go through h- through
primary there and middle upper primary now, they never really learned to read
properly. It was a real struggle. I've had a five-year-old start this year and they
are way, like way better than, than the, my first child
who's not had structured literacy." And it's those stories that make this-
And just um, uh, uh, follow-up on that.
So you, they, there's been a bit of feedback around the, the, the, the
sheer pace and the amount of change and it's put a lot of p- pressure on the
teaching profession, in particular. I know you've acknowledged that.
So just, so but why has it been so important to
actually deliver on the, for example, structure, literacy, and numeracy
changes at the pace you have?
Look, I, I think I said this on the media
before, you know, 60,000 kids start school every single year, and the
longer we wait, the more of those cohorts of kids go through school
without the benefit-
That's true.
... of a world-leading reform package.
Mm-hmm.
And, you know, I... When I came into this
role, every single curriculum area was due to be gazetted in
2027. The whole lot, every single one. Done.
We have taken an approach where we have stepped it out, we have listened to the
sector, you know, 2024, '25, and '26, we are fully embedding
properly, English and maths.
Really appreciate
And I gave you the stats before about what we're doing.
Uh, then we have, of course, paced out, uh, three other
areas which won't come in the gazette until 2027, and then three after that.
But we will, of course, provide all of the supports that go along with it,
uh, to make... You know, you saw the maths, the maths books-
Mm-hmm.
... the professional learning and development, all of the resources, as much as we
can to support teachers 'cause it is, it is a huge undertaking.
Uh, we have to very carefully balance those two things.
Mm-hmm.
Making sure that we are implementing things at pace so that these 60,000 kids who
start school each year have, have these benefits.
Uh, and, and you can see the improvements. I want them to have those improvements.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. They're very big.
Uh, as well as making sure we're looking after our teachers and our principals.
They're, they're really big.
And so we are always taking advice on ma- um, on what we
can do to make sure that we are... And we already pushed out, uh, some
of those curriculum areas, we already made a change.
And of course, we're always open to making changes on the feedback of the sector.
And I had a really, really good, uh, discussion actually this week or last week
with the Southland prim- primary principals-
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. ... association who are really good, uh, at providing advice and help.
Um, and they've given us some suggestions as well about how we can ease the load,
and we're always open to that.
Thank you.
All right. Um, Lawrence, you've got a thought.
Yeah, I mean, I, I want to check with the minister then, with
the positive feedback, with concerns and criticisms that
people have raised, parents or teachers or principals, et cetera, that comes to
you, Minister. How do you... how...
what are the proportion of that and how do you-
Mm-hmm.
... re- address those sort of concerns that people have?
Um, look, I can't recall any... there may well be, but I can't recall
any, uh, negative feedback from parents.
The feedback has been overwhelmingly positive from parents, uh, including-
Okay,
they're still getting letters- ... and so I, um-
Uh, can we let the minister finish?
Those parents-
Although if you're gonna chip in, I won't give you a question.
Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, so in terms of parents-
It's the same
one. ... the feedback has been overwhelmingly positive.
Uh, and look, from the sector, as I say, we always listen to the feedback.
When they said to us, "Hey, look, uh,
it's gonna be too much with all these curriculum areas in one year." We listened to
what they said and we've paced it out.
We also made sure that when we implemented, uh, maths and English, we said to
them, "Hey, look, go at your own pace.
There are some of you who've been doing structured literacy for five years and you
are ready to go with maths," which is why we wanted to have it ready for them.
Uh, and, uh, there are some schools who are starting brand new with
structured literacy and structured maths, and some of them have just really focused
on structured literacy this year and only just starting on maths.
We always said to them, "You know, go at the pace that suits you." But the thing
I'm really heartened about is the ERO report, which shows that
all schools have picked up the reforms and are, uh, and, and, and are
implementing them. And I think from my understanding and discussions with
ERO and their right and understanding of the report that it's not...
Nothing has been implemented like this before.
Normally, you get, you know, a bunch that are go, go, go, some who are a bit
more resilient, re- resistant, and then some who just, uh, who don't do it.
Um, the entire workforce have implemented these
changes. It is overwhelming. The work that has gone on by principals and
teachers to implement this r- reform is absolutely outstanding
and that's why we owe them such a huge debt of gratitude.
But the results are the things-
Yes, they
do. ... that we are now seeing. I think it was 50% of teachers, uh, approximately in
ma- uh, in maths and English are seeing improved results.
75% of te- uh, parents are saying, "We're seeing improved results." Now, of
course, we asked ERO to do this review early so that we can learn from any
things that need to be fixed. Um, there's a couple of things.
One I'll announce soon, uh, but we will take all of that feedback and make sure
that we're implementing it to continue to get better and better and better.
Great. Shannon Grimer.
Thank you. Kia ora, Minister.
Kia ora.
Uh, why did you not work with the Minister of Vocational Education before
announcing your curriculum refresh?
Uh, I work with all my Cabinet colleagues. Uh, the Cabinet papers were circulated.
We had meetings and discussions and, uh, that's how the, the process
works.
How many meetings did you have with the Minister of Vocational Training?
Um,
I can't tell you off the top of my head, but of course, when we, uh, go
through the process,
the- all ministers, including, uh, that minister, uh,
gets the an- initial Cabinet paper, draft Cabinet papers, they
get to feedback, we make changes and I can't tell you what those changes were
'cause I don't have them in front of
me. But there's no direct meetings between yourself and the minister o- for vocational
education. I have that on record.
Well, also, you've got to remember that she meets with the ministry.
And so all of this, it's not like it's being done in secret.
It's all being, it's all being done through our officials.
So she was well aware of what was happening and updated regularly....
and also through the cabinet process.
Hold on. Can we let the minister finish?
And then-
That's fine. ... you can have another supplement. Yep.
No, I was just saying that that's a cabinet process that we went through.
She also described that you were working closely on it.
Well-
I can't see, what's the evidence that suggests that yourself and the Minister of
Vocational Education, given the focus on vocational
pathways-
Mm-hmm.
... in your curriculum refresh, what is the evidence that demonstrates that?
So, she gets all of the papers. I get all of her papers.
We have si- uh, committees, many of them, where we discuss these things.
We also have, uh, groups called, uh, what's
The Labor Market Ministers Group, where we meet regularly.
So, while you might not see one between me and her specifically, there are many
groups, many meetings, many cabinet meetings, where we sit on the
same group and have these in-depth discussions to make sure that we're all lined
up. There are other ministers who are interested in workforce
development, uh, and, and, uh,
training. Uh, and so, uh, there's a group that Louise Upton runs that we
sit on as well. So there's many of these groups.
Sorry, I know that you're going through and looking to see if there's a one-on-one
with me and her, but there are many groups that we sit on.
Okay. Last up on this.
What evidence did you rely on to determine that ISBs are
the best placed mechanism to inform the replacement NCEA
curriculum-
The ministry.
Pardon?
Ministry.
Right.
The ministry give the advice-
Sorry, what was that evidence?
We-
So it's from the ministry, but what was the evidence that said that ISBs
were the best way to go?
You'll probably need to ask them, 'cause I haven't got it in front of me.
But I rely on the ministry, I relied on the ministry's advice that they were the
best, uh, as a replacement for the WDCs.
Um, and if, if the WDCs had still been in case, in place, then it would have been
them. Um, but they, from my memory, are best placed because they
are tied directly into industry. We wanted to make sure that, uh, the
curriculum and the standards that we were setting, uh, in industry-led
subjects
were exactly what was needed in the workforce.
The advice we had from NZQA is that there are a lot of children leaving, up
50%, who are saying to us, "The vocational work that we did at school
bore..." You know, was not helpful when we went into, when we went out to work or
further training. And so we had to solve that problem, and so we need someone who
is directly linked in to the industry and the sector to help us
set the standards, uh, and work with the curriculum so that we
can make sure that those pathways are seamless.
Uh, but also, you know, using NZQA to make sure that
they are aligned with tertiary standards as well, 'cause it's my expectation
that if you do, for example, hospitality at
year, uh, 12 and 13, it may very well be the case that you come out
with a level two or three tertiary qualification as well.
Great. Denise Arena.
And your timeline is 2029?
Sorry, Debra Sharp. Yep, Denise?
Thanks Chair, um-
Primary.
... uh, most of the news that we've heard has been really positive and really
excellent about all of this achievement.
And then we've got the, um, the capital expenditure and the
changes that we've had with the, um, property program.
Um, one thing that, um, I hadn't actually got quite
clear was the future planning for, um, new schools,
and, um, if there's a, a work program
underway, um, on that?
Uh, the answer is that there is. Um, there are, there is some work
going on. I can get Jerome to talk about it.
He's a bit more, uh, up to date with the sentiment than, than I am.
Uh, but there is work underway.
Mm-hmm.
We are trying to get ahead of the curve.
One of the, the things I, or the challenges I wasn't expecting was
the enormous deficit.
Mm-hmm. Uh, one of the ways to get ahead of the curve is to make sure that we are spending
money in property maintenance. Now, in Budget 2024 we put in,
I think it was about 780 million-odd in depreciation.
That was almost double the last six years
combined. Um, because it's very easy to take that and spend it on other things.
But if you're not continually spending money on maintenance and upgrading your
buildings, what eventually happens is you have to build new ones.
It's horrendously expensive. Uh, and so we have had a real focus on
making sure that we are pro- properly maintaining as well as growing the
network, uh, as well as trying to get ahead of the cr- curve by, uh, looking for
land in advance when it's not as expensive.
Mm-hmm.
There's a, there's a, there's a whole range of work that's going on.
But I think that the key thing that's going to help us with all of this, um, you
know, is the work that we're doing to move to a, uh, a Crown
entity, moving property into a Crown entity that, um, will make sure that
we can better these changes and go even further to get better value for money to
run it, um, you know, in a way that, uh, is good value for money
for, um, the taxpayer but also delivers, uh, really good outcomes for our
kids.
Deputy President, final Primary and we'll
keep it short. Primary, thank you. Kia ora, Minister.
Earlier this year, you came under fire for, uh, At The
Marae and directing for Maori words to be removed from junior
readers. Can you hand on heart confirm that there
have been no verbal or written instructions
from yourself or anyone in your office in any way, shape, or
form to remove, replace, uh, Te Reo
Maori in the curriculum and any references to
Aotearoa?
The first thing I want to say is that
your assertion about removing words from junior readers, not a
single word has been removed from a single book.
Not a single word. And I know that-
Sorry, removing the readers.
No, no, no.
Sorry, I said that wrong. Removing the readers.
I know, but it's unfortunate because it just, you know, it's out there-
Oh, yeah.
... and that, you know, wh- when it's said, it gets repeated and people think that,
you know, some reason that the government has removed words from books or removed
books. There is one book in a series of I think
75 that had a lot of very difficult Te Reo Maori words that we
turned into a big book that could be read to the class,
uh, rather than in the series of readers, uh, where children are learning to
decode words for the first time when they're only five years old and just learning
to read. Uh, that was the only change.
So, I just want to put that to bed because there has been-
... a lot of things that have been said about that....
as well as not directing (laughs) the removal of any words from any
books, or any books from any shelves, we went a step further, of course,
uh, Mr. Chair, and we ensured that...
'cause I, I've always been bothered by the fact that, uh, you
are learning to read Te Reo Māori words, and then you come across more of them in
junior journals that are,
that need to be decoded. And we don't teach our children to decode words.
So actually, the opposite is true to what the member is, is, is saying
about removing Māori words. In fact, uh, I think it's
year two now-
From the, from the curriculum.
I'm talking about the curriculum.
So in the curriculum now-
Mm.
... we actually teach children to decode Māori words.
Uh, and
that is going to be crucial-
Mm.
... for when they carry on, that they can fluently read Te Reo Māori words,
as well as English words. That's never been done before, uh, and is really
important. Now to the next part of the m- member's question, uh,
when we, uh, set up the design criteria for the curriculum,
we wanted to make sure that, uh, Te Reo Māori was included in this
curriculum. If you look through the curriculum, there are more Māori
words in this curriculum than the old curriculum.
There is... In every single learning area, there is Te Reo Māori, there is Te Reo
Māori more than ever. In fact, we're teaching children place value through Te
Reo Māori because, uh, you know, it's 13, 14, very
difficult, but 10, three, 10, four in Māori is so much better.
So despite what she's saying-
That was the
acronym. ... there is more Mā... My direction was more Māori words,
more learning of how to, uh, uh, uh, pronounce Māori words
in the curriculum than there has ever been.
Thank you, um, Minister. That brings us to a conclusion.
We've got our next minister, um, waiting. Appreciate your time.
And as you acknowledged, um, both your chief executives, uh, we, we acknowledged
their appointment earlier today as well, so I thank you for having them, uh, here
as well.
Um, members, we're now going to go to our
associate minister.
(laughing) ???
Oh, thanks. No, uh, well, look at-
Good evening, Minister. We've got, uh, just under half an hour with you, um, this
evening, uh, including, uh, some introductory remarks.
I'll hand straight over to you.
Well, I'll try not to, to take any offense that you used up some of my time
questioning Erica, but, um, look, first of all, thank you very much for having me
here. I'm here to talk about the delegations that I have,
um, in the education space, uh, that
is, uh, Healthy School Lunch Program, uh, attendance,
charter schools, uh, early childhood education, uh,
integrated schools, and independent schools.
Um, starting with the Healthy School Lunch Program, um, the, the net
outcome is that we have retained the same surplus levels as the
previous program, uh, but we will save the taxpayer
$275 million
over the coming... over the two years, uh, this year and
next. In a country that needs to do things smarter, save money, and
become more productive, uh, I regard that as a major, uh,
success story. And we're very proud of what we've achieved.
In the next year, we'll roll out to, uh, primary schools which
have been, uh, included in the old system until
now. From next year, all schools, uh, will be in the
new system, uh, with substantial cost savings.
Uh, in terms of attendance, uh, we've had steadily improving
figures, uh, term by term. Uh, we've had, uh, for the first
time since the coalition government was sworn in, a
decli- a term on term decline by a very small amount, about
one percentage point, uh, in term three of
2025 being lower than term three of 2024.
Um, however, that first decline occurred in circumstances where we
had the worst sickness, uh, since term two
2022. And in term two 2022, um,
the overall attendance was 39% versus 51% last term,
so, uh, we still feel that that represents progress if you allow for the level of
sickness. We also note that in the last t- in the last week,
uh, when that term fell behind its predecessor, uh, there were rolling
teacher strikes and there is reasonable evi- or it is reasonable to
believe that when teachers don't show up, uh, it's possible that
students won't show up the next day, especially in the last week of term.
Uh, so while we, you know, obviously want to get better every term, uh, there
are some reasons why we're less concerned about that term.
More importantly, we are seeing the STAR, the Stu- Step to Attendance
Response Scheme being, uh, r- rolled out.
That's been co-designed with principals and practitioners up and down the
country. It'll be backed by $140 million of additional
funding for a totally redesigned and repurposed attendant service over the
next four years. And that has been informed by the research of the
Education Review Office, Ruth Sonoda, who you had here, uh, a
second ago. Um, when it comes to charter schools, we
see, uh, strong interest, uh, both in new charter schools
and existing charter schools. Currently eight operating, nine
contracted, a further seven, uh, that are in negotiation as new
schools, and a total of 14 in varying stages of the conversion
process. Um, we hope to be able to confirm converting charter
schools to open very soon. I'm very pleased with the way that
this, that the charter school agency and the board are operating.
Uh, however, I'm a lot more pleased to see, on balance, a
strong attendance, a wide range of schools, vulnerable learners
being helped everywhere from Torito, uh, in the far north, to
Christcan- Christchurch North College, um, in Christ- in
Christchurch, obviously. Um, if you're following, just seeing if everyone's
following along.
(laughs)
Um, so we're very pleased with what's happening there.
In early childhood education, uh, in collaboration with the Ministry
for Regulation, we are introducing, by the middle of next year, an entirely new
regulatory system, which has been a large bugbear of people
operating early childhood systems, the amount of irrational paperwork,
fractious relationships with the regulator.
Uh, we will have, uh, a new regulator, being the Education Review
Office, a new way of regulating set out under legislation
recently passed that is far more, I guess, stepwise and
proportionate rather than high stakes, um, and also
licensing criteria that will be significantly simplified and focused
on, uh, student education. Uh, in independent schools, we've seen
an uplift in the budget for the amount of funding, which has come after a very long
time of being a neglected sector, uh, at budget time.
I think those are the... If I've forgotten an area, um, I, I can come back to it,
but I'm-
I'm sure
you'll get a question. ... I'm sure people would probably like the, the chance to ask questions.
Lawrence, uh, first question for you.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, just before I ask my question, I wanted to seek guidance from
the Chair that in this select committee, the chamber rules apply
here. And I just noticed-
Mm-hmm.
... the Minister's pin-
Oh. Well, if that's, if that's your biggest concern, I can, I can accommodate that.
How many times are we- We did, we did ask another media.
We did ask, so, so it's only fair. Thank you, Chair.
Um, questions around the school lunches. And I have a couple of questions.
And the first question is-
Go
for it. ... in 2024 to 2025, which is the year, period we're looking at, the budget for
Kārokaoko is (audio cuts out) $119 million.
But in terms of what we, the data we got from pre-hearing questions from the
Ministry, um, Compass itself has received
$143.5 million,
um, plus an $18 million, and also an additional
$1.8 million for waste disposal. So,
that doesn't seem like a $3 lunch program.
So, is it something that... And with the newer primary ones, we're seeing
that some of them is pushing up to $5.
So, are we saying that the $3 is not working,
from a minister's perspective, that actually a increased cost should
be, should be examined?
Uh, well first of all, the, the $3 has worked.
Uh, but of course, a year in there was always going to be a revision based on price
changes. Um, if anyone who's lived through the last few years will know that
food price inflation a couple a years ago was as high as 12%.
So, it would be prudent to, to build in an adjustment, and we did, and an
adjustment has occurred. Um, you also, I should note that,
uh, while $3 was the initial base price, uh, for the
meals, it's also the case that for senior students we priced
at, in I think it was 86 cents, uh, addition for a-
84.
Sorry, 80-
84 cents.
If, if, if you, yeah, 84, you may be correct.
But in any event, uh, there was an additional amount for senior students, so that
will partly explain some of the difference.
Uh, you then referred to the difference for, uh, the
new primary school, uh, uh, contract.
Uh, you're correct, some of those are as high as $5.
The average is $3.46.
Mm-hmm.
The reason that some of those, uh, are more expensive is primary schools
generally are smaller-
That's true.
... and generally are more isolated and harder to service.
Uh, so as a result, we've got a different set of contractors who are more
localized. But normally when something has a smaller scale, it costs
more, and that's why we've been able to save so much by going to a large provider
for the majority.
Can I just check there, Minister, on another sup, and I have another sup after
this, Chair. Um, but if you're looking at, you know,
what is budgeted for 119, it's then given out at, at
143 plus an 18 million plus a 1.8 million.
You're looking at a, an extra $44 million just for Compass
alone in one year. That's not simply just meeting inflation.
That's a substantial increase, wouldn't you agree?
Well, you might be getting into the timing of payments.
It may be that, uh, those payments were for a period longer
than, than you're, than you're imagining.
But I mean, always happy to come back with you, back to you and show those numbers
stack up.
I don't think we understand, sir. Okay. We'll get there on a follow-up.
One final sup-
Final sup? ... is what sort of data has the Minister seen in terms of the
waste to the current school lunch program?
And we're looking at both in terms of the surplus, but also in terms of
waste at each individual schools.
Hmm. Well, I can give you precise figures if you like, but when it comes to
the waste, if you look at the last few years, um, going back to
2021 in fact, uh, the level of surplus lunches has
been as high as 13% and as low as eight.
In the last year for the first three terms it's averaging out I think at 10.3
or 10.6. So, it's right in the zone of where
it's traditionally been. And that's why in my opening remarks I said, "Look, same
level of waste and surplus, about $275 million surplus." Uh,
that is a pretty good saving for the taxpayer.
And it's a good example of what I believe the New Zealand Government needs to do
right across the board, is find ways to actually save money, start
reducing debt on the next generation who we're doing this for, uh, and yet
deliver the same quality which we have.
Okay. Sup from Willoughby.
Thank you. At what point after a child has been
burnt, another has bitten into plastic, bugs have
been served up in lunches, will you concede that
this program has been a flop?
About the same time as you get an Oscar
for that performance. (laughs)
Supplementary.
Yeah.
Instead of bullying those who speak up about the school
lunches,
why won't you allow anybody who is not happy with the
school lunches provided by the School Lunch Collective to leave the
contract?
Well, it's very simple. Uh, we deliver free meals paid
for by the taxpayer. Uh, that is a very good deal.
Um, and as for your accusations of bullying, I mean, th- this is supposed to be an
exercise in evaluating value for taxpayer money.
Um, if you're looking for another career as an actor, then, um, you know, I-
Oh, I'll get a bit of rest.
Do you think it's appropriate?
You g- (laughs)
Do you think your behavior's been appropriate?
Abso- I absolutely do.
Can we just pull this back in? Uh, let's just lift it-
Yeah.
... ask the question, get an answer.
But the point is well-made. If you want a serious answer-
Yeah.
... ask a serious question.
But it was a serious-
Ask serious answers.
It is a serious question. The way the Deputy Prime Minister has been
bullying a principal who was simply speaking up on behalf
of her school after they had an issue, I think
is unprofessional-
Mm-hmm.
... by this minister. That school has asked to leave this program
before, and the, and that has not been allowed.
Well, I flatly reject the accusation. You know?
Right. Sorry, we're gonna move on to, uh-
They have been bullied.
Absolutely.
... from Panji.
Thank you. So, Minister, uh, just before you, not just before
you, we had another minister before, uh, when we were talking to Ministry of
Education, they told us that the data collection for the previous, uh, lunches
program was not that great. And now the data collection is really
thorough. So, I want to understand from you this kind of shift-
Mm-hmm.
... that has happened, uh, since this new program has been put in place.
Um, I mean, it, it will provide that reliability and
consistency-
Mm-hmm.
... that we seek. Uh, but are you able to assure us that, uh, the data
collection is really thorough? And is there, are there any gaps in there?
Yeah, sure. So, I mean, o-one of the things that's changed is that we've gone to a
single provider, a single system, so we're tracking everything.
And if a report comes in, it goes to one place and we can collect it together.
Um, that's what's been really important here, in terms of being able to get better
information. I think it's probably fair to say that previously, with a, a
large number of localized providers, um, you
found that if somebody made a complaint, they might make it to their local
provider. That might or might not come back and be centrally reported,
so, um, you know, unfortunately, we probably didn't get all the
information, uh, and we never will.
Um, nonetheless, um, I thought the point was well-made
when, uh, a member of the opposition showed a, a picture
of a lunch and, and tried to purport, uh, purported that that was a lunch
under the coalition government's policy-
Which
is 30 days. ... um, and it turned out it was a picture of a lunch that had been taken when
that member of the opposition was the minister.
Sent by your successor.
Uh, so there's, there's always been, um, a, a, a, there's always
been-
More pure images though.
... um, you know, quality issues. Um, but I would argue that we're being more
h- honest and upfront about them 'cause we've got better data 'cause it's
centralized now.
Okay. Um, let's start up, and then I'm gonna start from Vanessa.
So, given that the data collection was not that thorough under the previous
program, even if we get the numbers on, uh, waste percentage and
also the complaints-
Mm-hmm.
... um, don't you think that it's, it won't be the right
comparison?
Well, that's certainly true. I mean, y- you know, we have
started reporting daily our percentage on time delivery, and it's usually
over 99%. I've had people that work in, you know, airlines
and freight and logistics businesses saying, "We can't believe what you guys are
achieving with the delivery of these healthy school lunches on time, under
budget every day." Um, it, it, it's very impressive stuff and we
have the data. Um, previously, with a decentralized
system, now there's strengths and weaknesses to that.
Of course, we're going to a more decentralized delivery system, uh, uh, with the
primary school contracts. Um, but certainly it was probably
harder to assemble all the data and have full transparency under the old system.
Okay. Vanessa Wenner.
Mine was about data and-
Right, fine. Let's move on then to, um, Willowgends
Primary.
Here's the next Oscar performance. Uh, Minister,
See if you, see if you get a nomination.
(laughs)
Bangers. So, recently Bangers Trust put forward a charter school
bid for Kelston Boys High School and that caused a lot of ongoing
and prolonged stress for the community and the
school.
My question to you, is can you provide any
assurance
that that experience will not hit in another
school, will not experience that type of pressure?
Well, depends what sort of reassurance you're looking.
I, I can't assure, uh, people that, that no one will ever be stressed
again, um, if that's what you're asking.
From the pressure-
Mm-hmm.
... to convert their school from a state school to a charter
school by an external group of
people.
Well, I mean, one of the requirements of converting a charter school is to have
community support. Um, that application has been stopped
because it doesn't have community support.
But, um, if you're asking, you know, should people be able to
discuss, uh, conversion-
Mm-hmm.
... particularly when they believe that their school is failing, as I said in my
opening remarks, um, there's currently 14 different school communities having that
conversation because a lot of people feel that what they are getting
is failing their children. And as a result, they are
looking for better alternatives and a lot of people see that in charter
schools.
Okay.
So, Minister-
Yep, last supplementary on this one.
Uh, in that case, there was a person associated with the trust, but not
on the trust deed, uh, who has a criminal record.
How do you expect the agency to assist and ensure the
safety and suitability of both those who apply to be charter
schools and those who are working with and for those
organizations taking up the bids?
Well, diligently, and y- you know, as you've just said yourself,
um, a, a person who was associated but not actually
part of the application-
No, not part of the trust.
... um, if you're, if you're suggesting that we're going to, uh, screen
people who apply for government contracts based on anyone they've ever
been associated with, well, that, that's clearly not viable.
Sorry, no safeguards.
Thank you.
Um, I think anyone watching this can see there's a bit of a difference between
understanding whether or not you can screen every person that an applicant's ever
been associated with and having no safeguards whatsoever.
Great. Pamjeet.
I think this might get a Grammy.
Uh, Minister, can you tell us if there is any involvement of your office
in the application process? Is it done totally independent of your office?
It's, it's not. And at any given time, I, I don't even...
Or sorry, well, it is independent.
(laughs)
We're not involved, is what I'm trying to say.
Um, at any given time, um, I, I know that there's 14.
I don't know who all of them are. Um, so yeah.
Right. Thank you, thank you.
Thanks very much, Pamjeet. Uh, primary from, uh, Lawrence.
Oh, supplementary.
Sorry, uh, s- supplementary, Lawrence.
Thank you. Um, just seeing there was another, another case e- instead of
seeking, um, the guidance from the Minister is around the New Zealand Performance
Academy Aotearoa NZPAA, which was, um,
basically a non-existent charitable trust.
And I guess where, what
assurance does the Minister have that when the authorization
board does in fact approve a charter school, a new,
um-
Or
a new name. ... yeah, a new charter school, that it's not going to be signing with a
non-existent entity that makes the contract?
Point
of order. Lawrence, we've got a point of order.
Point of order. This question was asked to Charter School Agency and they did
clarify that during the process that name had changed.
What's the-
So, that was an attachment error.
But what's the point of order, Pamjeet? What's your point of order?
The point of order is that the question is still being phrased as if the facts have
not been clarified.... whereas the facts were clarified by the charter school
agency.
So, if you ask the question-
Pamjeet, I'm sorry, that's not a point of order.
Thank you.
And I... But I'm just-
... questions are ordered. Let the Minister answer.
Yeah. Yeah, well-
But I said seeking the Minister's perspective.
Yeah, well, I'm, I mean, I'm, I'm very happy to, to address it, although it is
worth noting the qu- question's been addressed already.
Um, look, it's very simple, uh, it's not
non-existent. The group of people are there, they'll be running the school, it's
going to be a great success, a lot of people very excited about the school.
Uh, the problem that they had was an administrative error, that the
name of the organization changed during the contract negotiations and they
still had the old name when they signed the contract.
Um, bit messy but what's the consequence?
Uh, there's no consequence. What we have now is a fantastic charter school, yet
another one going to open.
Thank you. Okay, primary from Grant McCully.
Thank you, um, thank you, uh, Chair.
Uh, yeah, Minister, you've, um, when you, uh ...
One of the pieces of legislation, uh, we passed recently was your ECE changes-
Mm-hmm.
... which attracted a lot of attention.
And, uh, I, I had, I'd been getting feedback from, um, you know,
people with, with families that were struggling to actually find, uh, enough
ECE facilities for their children.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
I'm just wondering what ... Was that part of your motivation or what were the main
motivations for actually, reasons for this change in this legislation?
Yeah, absolutely. Look, anything we can do to make it easier for people to
provide safe and educative, uh, early childhood centers
in every part of the country, it has got to be an improvement.
We don't want people
getting shut down, driven out of the industry, driven to
distraction, uh, by regulatory overburden.
Yeah.
And this is particularly important for what you might call smaller scale or some
people would say ma and pa operators, because if you're one of the really big ones
and there's a really complicated testy regulatory environment, you can
probably afford to b- to, to buy the support and to get in the
people to create the templates and learn the game and, and deal with them.
If you're perhaps, you know, a, a couple who have decided to
go into the business and start your own early childhood education center, you don't
have any of that, you've got to start from scratch.
And the harder the regulatory environment is, the more daunting and the worse
the stories you've heard are, the less likely you are to do it.
So anything we can do to make it easier, particularly to get small scale providers-
Mm-hmm.
... in, in, in more regional areas like the Northland electorate-
Yeah, yeah.
... uh, then that's a, a really big positive.
Um, but, you know, overall, uh, we have, I think, a duty to
make sure that the regulations keep the children safe, focus on the educational
quality, make sure the children are informed, and those are exactly the principles
that we passed in that legislation.
Okay, um, supplementary from Lawrence.
I have a couple of subs for, um, on this, Chair.
What evidence does the Minister have that the changes to the
ECE regulations is actually going to be safer for
kids?
Well, you start off where we are and then you look at the changes that we're
making. We're ensuring that the relationships between
the, uh, regulator, which is now going to be ERO
eventually, and the daycare center is, is stronger.
And having that proportional approach I think strengthens the relationship.
One of the things that I've heard under the old system is that because
there's a fearful or fractious relationship between the regulator and the
regulated, they might actually hesitate to call the Ministry when they have a
problem because they're scared of what happens if they come around, they'll find
something, they'll shut us down. So improving that relationship with more
proportional regulation, I think that's really important.
The other thing that we've done is we've actually said these are the principles,
this is why the Government regulates, uh, early childhood
according to a parliamentary statute. And, uh, one ...
Of course, you, you were in the House asking lots of questions about this.
Um, you'll know that
f- first and foremost, the first principle is we are going to focus on
child safety.
Just checking, in terms of some of the, um, progress
around this in Australia where
changes to the regulatory environment-
Mm-hmm.
... has actually meant that more child has been put at harm's way-
... what evidence or what communications ...
'Cause we've heard before from ERO, from NZQA, they all talk to Australia and
various other areas-
Mm-hmm.
... what conversations has the Minister had with Australia around the changes
to their ECE environment that has meant that it was less safe
for students, for kids?
Well, we don't, we don't have any reason to think that we're going to make our
environment less safe. We haven't consulted with the Australians.
Uh, we're very confident in the policy that we have.
Okay, primary from Lawrence.
Oh, no, that was-
Oh, you're done?
Yep.
Any other primaries?
That was it.
Yeah.
Willexi.
Oh, okay. Um,
so back on charter schools, I mean, we've only just managed to get
some, uh, enrollment numbers from the
agency because, uh, schools are being
directed not to reveal their enrollment numbers by
the agency
for reasons of commercial sensitivity.
In terms of that, I think we ... Our latest figures were something
around 400 and
over 450 for eight schools.
Do you think that this is the best use of taxpayers'
money?
Yeah, absolutely, because the children in these schools are entitled
to an education. And I think one of the things that's sometimes forgotten is
those children do actually deserve an opportunity.
Just 'cause they go to charter schools, which some people don't like, doesn't take
away from that child's right to opportunity.
Then you say, okay, well, you, you know, how many students are there and how much
funding in the first year? The reason that I've been keen not to have these
figures bandied about is that there will always be people who try and
do the maths and construct a false figure for how much these schools cost per
student. The truth is that they cost exactly the same as a state school
over the 10-year contracted period, which is the right way to do
it. And I can give you an example of what it looks like on the ground.
Um, this morning I was at Busee School, K Road, Auckland.
I was at their prize giving. Absolutely astonishing the, the turnarounds
in some of these students' lives in one year.
Um, they started off at the start of this year with 26 students, now they've
got about 70. They have 96 enrollments already for the
start of next year. They'll hit 100, which is their goal.
Their goal is to grow through to 200 by the end of next year.
And based on their performances this year, I think they'll do it.
Um, so I would say if you look at that school as they
grow, a lot of kids' lives being turned around and they get to a
scale where they cost no more or less than a state school with the same children,
yeah, I, I'd say, I'd say the first year is worth it to get there.
Uh, supplementary, Minister. You just mentioned there the reason why you didn't
want those figures out there, so was it that it is, uh, politically
sensitive, not commercially sensitive?
Uh, no, actually. It's because I know that if they are
a- attacked with false figures, then that's going to produce their commercial
position.
Okay. Lawrence, um, your start.
Well, it's not what I just said but-
I have a couple of subs on this.
And I think the first one-
Yeah.
... to pick up on what the minister's saying, if they are being paid at the same
level-
Mm-hmm.
... why then has the minister not proactively released the
calculations or the formula or how much each school is being funded for?
Well, we're happy to-
In the last-
... happy to do that, um, you know, over the time of the 10-year contract.
But what we haven't wanted to do is release numbers in the, the
first few months when they have a very small number of students, as all
schools. A state school starts up, a private school starts up, they all have a
small number of students on the first day.
Um, and then have people, as I've seen in the past, uh, misuse and, and
misinform, uh, based on calculations that don't reflect the cost of the
school per student over its lifetime, which is, which is the price that matters.
Well, that's not the only calculation available.
Okay. Second sub.
Second sub. Um, if the charter schools model is around having the
flexibility to design different learning environments (techno music plays)
Mm-hmm.
... (techno music plays) out of, how does that match up with the Minister of
Education's goal of having a nationalized and standard consistent
knowledge-rich curriculum? Isn't that in conflict?
No, not at all. Erica is doing, I think, a absolutely incredible
job of running state schools well.
Good curriculum, good pedagogy, good initial teacher
education, good buildings even, 'cause th- they're in a real mess but she's
fixing that up. Um, what we're doing is making sure that charter schools
as an alternative, which also have all of those things but different, are a
competitive and attractive alternative.
Because look, you know, students are all different and they should have choices,
and under this government, they do.
They have a very competitive state system and very good charters as
well.
Parmjeet, sub.
What kind of interest are you seeing from, uh, parents, uh, for enrolling their
children in charter schools?
Uh, well, enormous. I mean, you know, just y- just
yesterday, I got, uh, an email from a, a couple of
grandparents who said, "Look, our, our, um, we look after our
grandson. Um, he's, uh, all, all... has autism.
Um, we, we wonder if y- you know, can you set up a, a charter
school in our city?" And I was able to explain that, um, you know, the autism
school may well be able to help them.
Um, that's just one of the areas where people have demand.
Um, you'd be amazed at the number of
iwi. I was, uh, this morning with a, a very respected, uh,
leader, uh, in an Auckland iwi that, uh, may well end up with a
charter school very soon. So, it, it's from all over the place.
It's-
That's right.
... you know, we have a French school that's, um, it's really, it's really
extraordinary how much demand there is out there once you just show
people that whiff of possibility.
Okay. Final question, Lawrence.
Yeah. So, thanks, Chair. Just, just going back
to the, just going back to the charter school, um,
question that I had before.
If what we're seeing is that the Minister's doing a good job,
again, charter school's also been do- doing a good job-
Mm-hmm.
... and they're completely different curriculum-
... which one is right then?
Well, here's the thing. Um, y- you know, the Green Party used to believe in
diversity, and sometimes different people have different needs and they can both
be happy together.
You just can't do that in the state schools.
But then the question is, don't we have enough diversity already in terms of the
flexibility? So, for
Well, I think,
well, I think- ... why can't we have a say
on- Well, I think that-
I think that should, I think-
Let the question finish.
I think that should be up to the parents and the students, and they should choose.
And I hope that there'll be an educational opportunity that best fits
every student so they can each reach their potential in this beautiful country.
Okay. I think that's a good place to leave it. Let's, um, move into private.
Thank you
very much. Thank you, Minister. Thank you to all the advisers, um, and
ministry staff in Allen.
Well done, Minister.
(laughs) Yeah.
See
you.